  CASSIUS. Fellow, come from the throng; look upon Caesar.
  CASSIUS. Will you go see the order of the course?
  CASSIUS. I pray you, do.
  CASSIUS. Brutus, I do observe you now of late;
    I have not from your eyes that gentleness
    And show of love as I was wont to have;
    You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand
    Over your friend that loves you.
  CASSIUS. Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion,  
    By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried
    Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
    Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?
  CASSIUS. 'Tis just,
    And it is very much lamented, Brutus,
    That you have no such mirrors as will turn
    Your hidden worthiness into your eye
    That you might see your shadow. I have heard
    Where many of the best respect in Rome,
    Except immortal Caesar, speaking of Brutus
    And groaning underneath this age's yoke,
    Have wish'd that noble Brutus had his eyes.
  CASSIUS. Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear,
    And since you know you cannot see yourself
    So well as by reflection, I your glass  
    Will modestly discover to yourself
    That of yourself which you yet know not of.
    And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus;
    Were I a common laugher, or did use
    To stale with ordinary oaths my love
    To every new protester, if you know
    That I do fawn on men and hug them hard
    And after scandal them, or if you know
    That I profess myself in banqueting
    To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.
                                             Flourish and shout.
  CASSIUS. Ay, do you fear it?
    Then must I think you would not have it so.
  CASSIUS. I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus,
    As well as I do know your outward favor.
    Well, honor is the subject of my story.
    I cannot tell what you and other men
    Think of this life, but, for my single self,
    I had as lief not be as live to be
    In awe of such a thing as I myself.
    I was born free as Caesar, so were you;
    We both have fed as well, and we can both
    Endure the winter's cold as well as he.
    For once, upon a raw and gusty day,
    The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,
    Caesar said to me, "Darest thou, Cassius, now
    Leap in with me into this angry flood
    And swim to yonder point?" Upon the word,
    Accoutred as I was, I plunged in
    And bade him follow. So indeed he did.  
    The torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it
    With lusty sinews, throwing it aside
    And stemming it with hearts of controversy.
    But ere we could arrive the point proposed,
    Caesar cried, "Help me, Cassius, or I sink!
    I, as Aeneas our great ancestor
    Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
    The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber
    Did I the tired Caesar. And this man
    Is now become a god, and Cassius is
    A wretched creature and must bend his body
    If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
    He had a fever when he was in Spain,
    And when the fit was on him I did mark
    How he did shake. 'Tis true, this god did shake;
    His coward lips did from their color fly,
    And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world
    Did lose his luster. I did hear him groan.
    Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans
    Mark him and write his speeches in their books,  
    Alas, it cried, "Give me some drink, Titinius,"
    As a sick girl. Ye gods! It doth amaze me
    A man of such a feeble temper should
    So get the start of the majestic world
    And bear the palm alone. Shout.                    Flourish.
  CASSIUS. Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world
    Like a Colossus, and we petty men
    Walk under his huge legs and peep about
    To find ourselves dishonorable graves.
    Men at some time are masters of their fates:
    The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
    But in ourselves that we are underlings.
    Brutus and Caesar: what should be in that "Caesar"?
    Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
    Write them together, yours is as fair a name;
    Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;
    Weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with 'em,  
    "Brutus" will start a spirit as soon as "Caesar."
    Now, in the names of all the gods at once,
    Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed
    That he is grown so great? Age, thou art shamed!
    Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!
    When went there by an age since the great flood
    But it was famed with more than with one man?
    When could they say till now that talk'd of Rome
    That her wide walls encompass'd but one man?
    Now is it Rome indeed, and room enough,
    When there is in it but one only man.
    O, you and I have heard our fathers say
    There was a Brutus once that would have brook'd
    The eternal devil to keep his state in Rome
    As easily as a king.
  CASSIUS. I am glad that my weak words
    Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.
            Re-enter Caesar and his Train.
  CASSIUS. As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
    And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
    What hath proceeded worthy note today.
  CASSIUS. Casca will tell us what the matter is.
  CASSIUS. They shouted thrice. What was the last cry for?
  CASSIUS. Who offered him the crown?
  CASSIUS. But, soft, I pray you, what, did Caesars wound?
  CASSIUS. No, Caesar hath it not, but you, and I,
    And honest Casca, we have the falling sickness.
  CASSIUS. Did Cicero say anything?
  CASSIUS. To what effect?
  CASSIUS. Will you sup with me tonight, Casca?
  CASSIUS. Will you dine with me tomorrow?
  CASSIUS. Good, I will expect you.
  CASSIUS. So is he now in execution
    Of any bold or noble enterprise,
    However he puts on this tardy form.
    This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
    Which gives men stomach to digest his words
    With better appetite.
  CASSIUS. I will do so. Till then, think of the world.
                                                    Exit Brutus.
    Well, Brutus, thou art noble; yet, I see  
    Thy honorable mettle may be wrought
    From that it is disposed; therefore it is meet
    That noble minds keep ever with their likes;
    For who so firm that cannot be seduced?
    Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus.
    If I were Brutus now and he were Cassius,
    He should not humor me. I will this night,
    In several hands, in at his windows throw,
    As if they came from several citizens,
    Writings, all tending to the great opinion
    That Rome holds of his name, wherein obscurely
    Caesar's ambition shall be glanced at.
    And after this let Caesar seat him sure;
    For we will shake him, or worse days endure.           Exit.
SCENE III.
A street. Thunder and lightning.
Enter, from opposite sides, Casca, with his sword drawn, and Cicero.
  CASSIUS. Who's there?
  CASSIUS. Casca, by your voice.
  CASSIUS. A very pleasing night to honest men.
  CASSIUS. Those that have known the earth so full of faults.
    For my part, I have walk'd about the streets,
    Submitting me unto the perilous night,
    And thus unbraced, Casca, as you see,
    Have bared my bosom to the thunderstone;
    And when the cross blue lightning seem'd to open  
    The breast of heaven, I did present myself
    Even in the aim and very flash of it.
  CASSIUS. You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of life
    That should be in a Roman you do want,
    Or else you use not. You look pale and gaze
    And put on fear and cast yourself in wonder
    To see the strange impatience of the heavens.
    But if you would consider the true cause
    Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
    Why birds and beasts from quality and kind,
    Why old men, fools, and children calculate,
    Why all these things change from their ordinance,
    Their natures, and preformed faculties
    To monstrous quality, why, you shall find
    That heaven hath infused them with these spirits
    To make them instruments of fear and warning  
    Unto some monstrous state.
    Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man
    Most like this dreadful night,
    That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars
    As doth the lion in the Capitol,
    A man no mightier than thyself or me
    In personal action, yet prodigious grown
    And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.
  CASSIUS. Let it be who it is, for Romans now
    Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors.
    But, woe the while! Our fathers' minds are dead,
    And we are govern'd with our mothers' spirits;
    Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.
  CASSIUS. I know where I will wear this dagger then:
    Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius.  
    Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong;
    Therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat.
    Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
    Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron
    Can be retentive to the strength of spirit;
    But life, being weary of these worldly bars,
    Never lacks power to dismiss itself.
    If I know this, know all the world besides,
    That part of tyranny that I do bear
    I can shake off at pleasure.                  Thunder still.
  CASSIUS. And why should Caesar be a tyrant then?
    Poor man! I know he would not be a wolf
    But that he sees the Romans are but sheep.
    He were no lion, were not Romans hinds.
    Those that with haste will make a mighty fire
    Begin it with weak straws. What trash is Rome,
    What rubbish, and what offal, when it serves  
    For the base matter to illuminate
    So vile a thing as Caesar? But, O grief,
    Where hast thou led me? I perhaps speak this
    Before a willing bondman; then I know
    My answer must be made. But I am arm'd,
    And dangers are to me indifferent.
  CASSIUS. There's a bargain made.
    Now know you, Casca, I have moved already
    Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans
    To undergo with me an enterprise
    Of honorable-dangerous consequence;
    And I do know by this, they stay for me
    In Pompey's Porch. For now, this fearful night,
    There is no stir or walking in the streets,
    And the complexion of the element  
    In favor's like the work we have in hand,
    Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.
                       Enter Cinna.
  CASSIUS. 'Tis Cinna, I do know him by his gait;
    He is a friend. Cinna, where haste you so?
  CASSIUS. No, it is Casca, one incorporate
    To our attempts. Am I not stay'd for, Cinna?
  CASSIUS. Am I not stay'd for? Tell me.
  CASSIUS. Be you content. Good Cinna, take this paper,
    And look you lay it in the praetor's chair,
    Where Brutus may but find it; and throw this  
    In at his window; set this up with wax
    Upon old Brutus' statue. All this done,
    Repair to Pompey's Porch, where you shall find us.
    Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?
  CASSIUS. That done, repair to Pompey's Theatre.
                                                     Exit Cinna.
    Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day
    See Brutus at his house. Three parts of him
    Is ours already, and the man entire
    Upon the next encounter yields him ours.
  CASSIUS. Him and his worth and our great need of him
    You have right well conceited. Let us go,
    For it is after midnight, and ere day  
    We will awake him and be sure of him.                Exeunt.








ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Brutus in his orchard.
  CASSIUS. I think we are too bold upon your rest.
    Good morrow, Brutus, do we trouble you?
  CASSIUS. Yes, every man of them, and no man here
    But honors you, and every one doth wish
    You had but that opinion of yourself
    Which every noble Roman bears of you.
    This is Trebonius.  
  CASSIUS. This, Decius Brutus.
  CASSIUS. Shall I entreat a word?                 They whisper.
  CASSIUS. And let us swear our resolution.  
  CASSIUS. But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him?
    I think he will stand very strong with us.
  CASSIUS. Then leave him out.
  CASSIUS. Decius, well urged. I think it is not meet
    Mark Antony, so well beloved of Caesar,
    Should outlive Caesar. We shall find of him
    A shrewd contriver; and you know his means,
    If he improve them, may well stretch so far
    As to annoy us all, which to prevent,
    Let Antony and Caesar fall together.
  CASSIUS. Yet I fear him,
    For in the ingrated love he bears to Caesar-
  CASSIUS. The clock hath stricken three.
  CASSIUS. But it is doubtful yet
    Whether Caesar will come forth today or no,
    For he is superstitious grown of late,
    Quite from the main opinion he held once
    Of fantasy, of dreams, and ceremonies.
    It may be these apparent prodigies,
    The unaccustom'd terror of this night,
    And the persuasion of his augurers
    May hold him from the Capitol today.
  CASSIUS. Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.
  CASSIUS. The morning comes upon 's. We'll leave you, Brutus,
    And, friends, disperse yourselves, but all remember
    What you have said and show yourselves true Romans.
  CASSIUS. What, urge you your petitions in the street?
    Come to the Capitol.
  
      Caesar goes up to the Senate House, the rest follow.
  CASSIUS. What enterprise, Popilius?
  CASSIUS. He wish'd today our enterprise might thrive.
    I fear our purpose is discovered.
  CASSIUS. Casca,
    Be sudden, for we fear prevention.
    Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,
    Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
    For I will slay myself.
  CASSIUS. Trebonius knows his time, for, look you, Brutus,
    He draws Mark Antony out of the way.  
                                    Exeunt Antony and Trebonius.
  CASSIUS. Pardon, Caesar! Caesar, pardon!
    As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall
    To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.
  CASSIUS. Some to the common pulpits and cry out
    "Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!"
  CASSIUS. And leave us, Publius, lest that the people
    Rushing on us should do your age some mischief.
  CASSIUS. Where is Antony?
  CASSIUS. Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
    Cuts off so many years of fearing death.
  CASSIUS. Stoop then, and wash. How many ages hence
    Shall this our lofty scene be acted over
    In states unborn and accents yet unknown!  
  CASSIUS. So oft as that shall be,
    So often shall the knot of us be call'd
    The men that gave their country liberty.
  CASSIUS. Ay, every man away.
    Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels
    With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.
                        Enter a Servant.
  CASSIUS. I wish we may, but yet have I a mind
    That fears him much, and my misgiving still
    Falls shrewdly to the purpose.
  
                          Re-enter Antony.
  CASSIUS. Your voice shall be as strong as any man's
    In the disposing of new dignities.
  CASSIUS. Mark Antony-
  CASSIUS. I blame you not for praising Caesar so;
    But what compact mean you to have with us?
    Will you be prick'd in number of our friends,
    Or shall we on, and not depend on you?
  CASSIUS. Brutus, a word with you.
    [Aside to Brutus.] You know not what you do. Do not consent
    That Antony speak in his funeral.
    Know you how much the people may be moved
    By that which he will utter?
  CASSIUS. I know not what may fall; I like it not.
  CASSIUS. Stand, ho!
  CASSIUS. Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
  CASSIUS. Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs,
    And when you do them-
  CASSIUS. Pindarus,
    Bid our commanders lead their charges off  
    A little from this ground.
  CASSIUS. That you have wrong'd me doth appear in this:
    You have condemn'd and noted Lucius Pella
    For taking bribes here of the Sardians,
    Wherein my letters, praying on his side,
    Because I knew the man, were slighted off.
  CASSIUS. In such a time as this it is not meet
    That every nice offense should bear his comment.
  CASSIUS. I an itching palm?
    You know that you are Brutus that speaks this,
    Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
  CASSIUS. Chastisement?
  CASSIUS. Brutus, bait not me,
    I'll not endure it. You forget yourself
    To hedge me in. I am a soldier, I,
    Older in practice, abler than yourself
    To make conditions.
  CASSIUS. I am.
  CASSIUS. Urge me no more, I shall forget myself;
    Have mind upon your health, tempt me no farther.
  CASSIUS. Is't possible?
  CASSIUS. O gods, ye gods! Must I endure all this?
  CASSIUS. Is it come to this?
  CASSIUS. You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus.
    I said, an elder soldier, not a better.
    Did I say "better"?
  CASSIUS. When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
  CASSIUS. I durst not?
  CASSIUS. What, durst not tempt him?
  CASSIUS. Do not presume too much upon my love;
    I may do that I shall be sorry for.
  CASSIUS. I denied you not.
  CASSIUS. I did not. He was but a fool
    That brought my answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart.
    A friend should bear his friend's infirmities,
    But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
  CASSIUS. You love me not.  
  CASSIUS. A friendly eye could never see such faults.
  CASSIUS. Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
    Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
    For Cassius is aweary of the world:
    Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
    Check'd like a bondman; all his faults observed,
    Set in a notebook, learn'd and conn'd by rote,
    To cast into my teeth. O, I could weep
    My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
    And here my naked breast; within, a heart
    Dearer than Pluto's mine, richer than gold.
    If that thou best a Roman, take it forth;
    I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
    Strike, as thou didst at Caesar, for I know,
    When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better
    Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.
  CASSIUS. Hath Cassius lived
    To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
    When grief and blood ill-temper'd vexeth him?
  CASSIUS. Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.
  CASSIUS. O Brutus!
  CASSIUS. Have not you love enough to bear with me
    When that rash humor which my mother gave me
    Makes me forgetful?
  CASSIUS. How now, what's the matter?
  CASSIUS. Ha, ha! How vilely doth this cynic rhyme!
  CASSIUS. Bear with him, Brutus; 'tis his fashion.
  CASSIUS. Away, away, be gone!                       Exit Poet.
  CASSIUS. And come yourselves and bring Messala with you
    Immediately to us.             Exeunt Lucilius and Titinius.
  CASSIUS. I did not think you could have been so angry.
  CASSIUS. Of your philosophy you make no use,
    If you give place to accidental evils.
  CASSIUS. Ha? Portia?
  CASSIUS. How 'scaped killing when I cross'd you so?
    O insupportable and touching loss!
    Upon what sickness?
  CASSIUS. And died so?  
  CASSIUS. O ye immortal gods!
               Re-enter Lucius, with wine and taper.
  CASSIUS. My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.
  Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup;
  I cannot drink too much of Brutus' love.               Drinks.
  CASSIUS. Portia, art thou gone?
  CASSIUS. Cicero one!
  CASSIUS. I have as much of this in art as you,
    But yet my nature could not bear it so.
  CASSIUS. I do not think it good.
  CASSIUS. This it is:
    'Tis better that the enemy seek us;
    So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
    Doing himself offense, whilst we lying still
    Are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.
  CASSIUS. Hear me, good brother.
  CASSIUS. Then, with your will, go on;
    We'll along ourselves and meet them at Philippi.
  CASSIUS. No more. Good night.
    Early tomorrow will we rise and hence.
  CASSIUS. O my dear brother!
    This was an ill beginning of the night.  
    Never come such division 'tween our souls!
    Let it not, Brutus.
  CASSIUS. Good night, my lord.
  CASSIUS. Stand fast, Titinius; we must out and talk.
  CASSIUS. Antony,
    The posture of your blows are yet unknown;
    But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees,
    And leave them honeyless.
  CASSIUS. Flatterers? Now, Brutus, thank yourself.
    This tongue had not offended so today,
    If Cassius might have ruled.  
  CASSIUS. A peevish school boy, worthless of such honor,
    Join'd with a masker and a reveler!
  CASSIUS. Why, now, blow and, swell billow, and swim bark!
    The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.
  CASSIUS. Messala!
  CASSIUS. Messala,
    This is my birthday, as this very day
    Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala.
    Be thou my witness that, against my will,
    As Pompey was, am I compell'd to set
    Upon one battle all our liberties.
    You know that I held Epicurus strong,
    And his opinion. Now I change my mind,
    And partly credit things that do presage.
    Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign
    Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perch'd,  
    Gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands,
    Who to Philippi here consorted us.
    This morning are they fled away and gone,
    And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
    Fly o'er our heads and downward look on us,
    As we were sickly prey. Their shadows seem
    A canopy most fatal, under which
    Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.
  CASSIUS. I but believe it partly,
    For I am fresh of spirit and resolved
    To meet all perils very constantly.
  CASSIUS. Now, most noble Brutus,
    The gods today stand friendly that we may,
    Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age!
    But, since the affairs of men rest still incertain,
    Let's reason with the worst that may befall.
    If we do lose this battle, then is this
    The very last time we shall speak together.  
    What are you then determined to do?
  CASSIUS. Then, if we lose this battle,
    You are contented to be led in triumph
    Thorough the streets of Rome?
  CASSIUS. Forever and forever farewell, Brutus!
    If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed;
    If not, 'tis true this parting was well made.
  CASSIUS. O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly!
    Myself have to mine own turn'd enemy.
    This ensign here of mine was turning back;
    I slew the coward, and did take it from him.
  CASSIUS. This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius:
    Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
  CASSIUS. Titinius, if thou lovest me,
    Mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him,
    Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops
    And here again, that I may rest assured
    Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.
  CASSIUS. Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill;
    My sight was ever thick; regard Titinius,
    And tell me what thou notest about the field.
                                      Pindarus ascends the hill.
    This day I breathed first: time is come round,
    And where I did begin, there shall I end;
    My life is run his compass. Sirrah, what news?
  CASSIUS. What news?
  CASSIUS. Come down; behold no more.
    O, coward that I am, to live so long,
    To see my best friend ta'en before my face!
                                              Pindarus descends.
    Come hither, sirrah.
    In Parthia did I take thee prisoner,
    And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
    That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
    Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath;
    Now be a freeman, and with this good sword,
    That ran through Caesar's bowels, search this bosom.
    Stand not to answer: here, take thou the hilts;
    And when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now,
    Guide thou the sword. [Pindarus stabs him.] Caesar, thou art
      revenged,
    Even with the sword that kill'd thee.                  Dies.
