  MRS PAGE. What! have I scap'd love-letters in the holiday-time
    of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them? Let
    me see.                                              [Reads]
    'Ask me no reason why I love you; for though Love use
    Reason for his precisian, he admits him not for his counsellor.
    You are not young, no more am I; go to, then, there's
    sympathy. You are merry, so am I; ha! ha! then there's
    more sympathy. You love sack, and so do I; would you
    desire better sympathy? Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page
    at the least, if the love of soldier can suffice-that I love
    thee. I will not say, Pity me: 'tis not a soldier-like phrase;
    but I say, Love me. By me,
    Thine own true knight,
    By day or night,
    Or any kind of light,
    With all his might,  
    For thee to fight,
    JOHN FALSTAFF.'
    What a Herod of Jewry is this! O wicked, wicked world!
    One that is well-nigh worn to pieces with age to show
    himself a young gallant! What an unweighed behaviour
    hath this Flemish drunkard pick'd-with the devil's name!
    -out of my conversation, that he dares in this manner
    assay me? Why, he hath not been thrice in my company!
    What should I say to him? I was then frugal of my mirth.
    Heaven forgive me! Why, I'll exhibit a bill in the parliament
    for the putting down of men. How shall I be
    reveng'd on him? for reveng'd I will be, as sure as his guts
    are made of puddings.
                       Enter MISTRESS FORD
  MRS PAGE. And, trust me, I was coming to you. You look
    very ill.  
  MRS PAGE. Faith, but you do, in my mind.
  MRS PAGE. What's the matter, woman?
  MRS PAGE. Hang the trifle, woman; take the honour. What
    is it? Dispense with trifles; what is it?
  MRS PAGE. What? Thou liest. Sir Alice Ford! These knights
    will hack; and so thou shouldst not alter the article of thy
    gentry.
  MRS PAGE. Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and
    Ford differs. To thy great comfort in this mystery of ill
    opinions, here's the twin-brother of thy letter; but let thine
    inherit first, for, I protest, mine never shall. I warrant he
    hath a thousand of these letters, writ with blank space for
    different names-sure, more!-and these are of the second
    edition. He will print them, out of doubt; for he cares not
    what he puts into the press when he would put us two. I
    had rather be a giantess and lie under Mount Pelion. Well,
    I will find you twenty lascivious turtles ere one chaste
    man.  
  MRS PAGE. Nay, I know not; it makes me almost ready to
    wrangle with mine own honesty. I'll entertain myself like
    one that I am not acquainted withal; for, sure, unless he
    know some strain in me that I know not myself, he would
    never have boarded me in this fury.
  MRS PAGE. So will I; if he come under my hatches, I'll never
    to sea again. Let's be reveng'd on him; let's appoint him a
    meeting, give him a show of comfort in his suit, and lead
    him on with a fine-baited delay, till he hath pawn'd his
    horses to mine host of the Garter.
  MRS PAGE. Why, look where he comes; and my good man
    too; he's as far from jealousy as I am from giving him  
    cause; and that, I hope, is an unmeasurable distance.
  MRS PAGE. Let's consult together against this greasy knight.
    Come hither.                                   [They retire]
           Enter FORD with PISTOL, and PAGE with Nym
  MRS PAGE. Whither go you, George? Hark you.
  MRS PAGE. Have with you. You'll come to dinner, George?
    [Aside to MRS. FORD]  Look who comes yonder; she shall
    be our messenger to this paltry knight.
  MRS PAGE. You are come to see my daughter Anne?
  MRS PAGE. Go in with us and see; we have an hour's talk
    with you.           Exeunt MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and
                                                MISTRESS QUICKLY
  MRS PAGE. Nay, keep your way, little gallant; you were
    wont to be a follower, but now you are a leader. Whether
    had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your master's heels?
  MRS PAGE. O, you are a flattering boy; now I see you'll be a
    courtier.
                          Enter FORD
  MRS PAGE. Truly, sir, to see your wife. Is she at home?
  MRS PAGE. Be sure of that-two other husbands.  
  MRS PAGE. I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my
    husband had him of. What do you call your knight's
    name, sirrah?
  MRS PAGE. He, he; I can never hit on's name. There is such
    a league between my good man and he! Is your wife at
    home indeed?
  MRS PAGE. By your leave, sir. I am sick till I see her.
                                      Exeunt MRS. PAGE and ROBIN
  MRS PAGE. Quickly, quickly! Is the buck-basket-
  MRS PAGE. Come, come, come.
  MRS PAGE. Give your men the charge; we must be brief.
  MRS PAGE. Here comes little Robin.
                         Enter ROBIN
  MRS PAGE. You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been true to us?
  MRS PAGE. Thou 'rt a good boy; this secrecy of thine shall
    be a tailor to thee, and shall make thee a new doublet and
    hose. I'll go hide me.
  MRS PAGE. I warrant thee; if I do not act it, hiss me.
                                                Exit MRS. PAGE
  MRS PAGE. O Mistress Ford, what have you done? You're  
    sham'd, y'are overthrown, y'are undone for ever.
  MRS PAGE. O well-a-day, Mistress Ford, having an honest
    man to your husband, to give him such cause of suspicion!
  MRS PAGE. What cause of suspicion? Out upon you, how
    am I mistook in you!
  MRS PAGE. Your husband's coming hither, woman, with all
    the officers in Windsor, to search for a gentleman that he
    says is here now in the house, by your consent, to take an
    ill advantage of his absence. You are undone.
  MRS PAGE. Pray heaven it be not so that you have such a
    man here; but 'tis most certain your husband's coming,
    with half Windsor at his heels, to search for such a one. I
    come before to tell you. If you know yourself clear, why,
    I am glad of it; but if you have a friend here, convey,
    convey him out. Be not amaz'd; call all your senses to you;
    defend your reputation, or bid farewell to your good life  
    for ever.
  MRS PAGE. For shame, never stand 'you had rather' and 'you
    had rather'! Your husband's here at hand; bethink you of
    some conveyance; in the house you cannot hide him. O,
    how have you deceiv'd me! Look, here is a basket; if he be
    of any reasonable stature, he may creep in here; and throw
    foul linen upon him, as if it were going to bucking, or-it is
    whiting-time-send him by your two men to Datchet
    Mead.
  MRS PAGE. What, Sir John Falstaff!      [Aside to FALSTAFF]
    Are these your letters, knight?
  MRS PAGE. Help to cover your master, boy. Call your men,
    Mistress Ford. You dissembling knight!
  MRS PAGE. Is there not a double excellency in this?
  MRS PAGE. What a taking was he in when your husband
    ask'd who was in the basket!
  MRS PAGE. Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all of the
    same strain were in the same distress.
  MRS PAGE. I Will lay a plot to try that, and we will yet have
    more tricks with Falstaff. His dissolute disease will scarce
    obey this medicine.
  MRS PAGE. We will do it; let him be sent for to-morrow
    eight o'clock, to have amends.
       Re-enter FORD, PAGE, CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS  
  MRS PAGE.  [Aside to MRS. FORD]  Heard you that?
  MRS PAGE. You do yourself mighty wrong, Master Ford.
  MRS PAGE. Good Master Fenton, come not to my child.
  MRS PAGE. I mean it not; I seek you a better husband.
  MRS PAGE. Come, trouble not yourself. Good Master
    Fenton,
    I will not be your friend, nor enemy;
    My daughter will I question how she loves you,
    And as I find her, so am I affected;
    Till then, farewell, sir; she must needs go in;
    Her father will be angry.
  MRS PAGE. Is he at Master Ford's already, think'st thou?
  MRS PAGE. I'll be with her by and by; I'll but bring my
    young man here to school. Look where his master comes;
    'tis a playing day, I see.
                     Enter SIR HUGH EVANS
    How now, Sir Hugh, no school to-day?
  MRS PAGE. Sir Hugh, my husband says my son profits
    nothing in the world at his book; I pray you ask him some
    questions in his accidence.  
  MRS PAGE. Come on, sirrah; hold up your head; answer your
    master; be not afraid.
  MRS PAGE. Peace.
  MRS PAGE. Prithee hold thy peace.
  MRS PAGE. He is a better scholar than I thought he was.
  MRS PAGE. Adieu, good Sir Hugh.                 Exit SIR HUGH
    Get you home, boy. Come, we stay too long.            Exeunt
SCENE 2.
FORD'S house
Enter FALSTAFF and MISTRESS FORD
  MRS PAGE.  [Within]  What hoa, gossip Ford, what hoa!
  MRS PAGE. How now, sweetheart, who's at home besides
    yourself?
  MRS PAGE. Indeed?  
  MRS PAGE. Truly, I am so glad you have nobody here.
  MRS PAGE. Why, woman, your husband is in his old lunes
    again. He so takes on yonder with my husband; so rails
    against all married mankind; so curses an Eve's daughters,
    of what complexion soever; and so buffets himself on the
    forehead, crying 'Peer-out, peer-out!' that any madness I
    ever yet beheld seem'd but tameness, civility, and patience,
    to this his distemper he is in now. I am glad the fat knight
    is not here.
  MRS PAGE. Of none but him; and swears he was carried out,
    the last time he search'd for him, in a basket; protests to
    my husband he is now here; and hath drawn him and the
    rest of their company from their sport, to make another
    experiment of his suspicion. But I am glad the knight is not
    here; now he shall see his own foolery.
  MRS PAGE. Hard by, at street end; he will be here anon.  
  MRS PAGE. Why, then, you are utterly sham'd, and he's but
    a dead man. What a woman are you! Away with him,
    away with him; better shame than murder.
  MRS PAGE. Alas, three of Master Ford's brothers watch the
    door with pistols, that none shall issue out; otherwise you
    might slip away ere he came. But what make you here?
  MRS PAGE. Creep into the kiln-hole.
  MRS PAGE. If you go out in your own semblance, you die,
    Sir John. Unless you go out disguis'd.
  MRS PAGE. Alas the day, I know not! There is no woman's
    gown big enough for him; otherwise he might put on a
    hat, a muffler, and a kerchief, and so escape.
  MRS PAGE. On my word, it will serve him; she's as big as he
    is; and there's her thrumm'd hat, and her muffler too. Run
    up, Sir John.
  MRS PAGE. Quick, quick; we'll come dress you straight. Put  
    on the gown the while.                         Exit FALSTAFF
  MRS PAGE. Heaven guide him to thy husband's cudgel; and
    the devil guide his cudgel afterwards!
  MRS PAGE. Ay, in good sadness is he; and talks of the basket
    too, howsoever he hath had intelligence.
  MRS PAGE. Nay, but he'll be here presently; let's go dress
    him like the witch of Brainford.
  MRS PAGE. Hang him, dishonest varlet! we cannot misuse
    him enough.
    We'll leave a proof, by that which we will do,  
    Wives may be merry and yet honest too.
    We do not act that often jest and laugh;
    'Tis old but true: Still swine eats all the draff.      Exit
            Re-enter MISTRESS FORD, with two SERVANTS
  MRS PAGE. Come, Mother Prat; come. give me your hand.
  MRS PAGE. Are you not asham'd? I think you have kill'd the
    poor woman.
  MRS PAGE. Trust me, he beat him most pitifully.
  MRS PAGE. I'll have the cudgel hallow'd and hung o'er the
    altar; it hath done meritorious service.
  MRS PAGE. The spirit of wantonness is sure scar'd out of
    him; if the devil have him not in fee-simple, with fine and
    recovery, he will never, I think, in the way of waste,
    attempt us again.
  MRS PAGE. Yes, by all means; if it be but to scrape the
    figures out of your husband's brains. If they can find in their
    hearts the poor unvirtuous fat knight shall be any further
    afflicted, we two will still be the ministers.
  MRS PAGE. Come, to the forge with it then; shape it. I
    would not have things cool.                           Exeunt  
SCENE 3.
The Garter Inn
Enter HOST and BARDOLPH
  MRS PAGE. Within a quarter of an hour.
  MRS PAGE. There is an old tale goes that Heme the Hunter,
    Sometime a keeper here in Windsor Forest,
    Doth all the winter-time, at still midnight,
    Walk round about an oak, with great ragg'd horns;
    And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
    And makes milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a chain
    In a most hideous and dreadful manner.
    You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know
    The superstitious idle-headed eld
    Receiv'd, and did deliver to our age,  
    This tale of Heme the Hunter for a truth.
  MRS PAGE. That likewise have we thought upon, and
    thus:
    Nan Page my daughter, and my little son,
    And three or four more of their growth, we'll dress
    Like urchins, ouphes, and fairies, green and white,
    With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads,
    And rattles in their hands; upon a sudden,
    As Falstaff, she, and I, are newly met,
    Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once
    With some diffused song; upon their sight  
    We two in great amazedness will fly.
    Then let them all encircle him about,
    And fairy-like, to pinch the unclean knight;
    And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel,
    In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
    In shape profane.
  MRS PAGE. The truth being known,
    We'll all present ourselves; dis-horn the spirit,
    And mock him home to Windsor.
  MRS PAGE. My Nan shall be the Queen of all the Fairies,
    Finely attired in a robe of white.  
  MRS PAGE. Fear not you that. Go get us properties
    And tricking for our fairies.
  MRS PAGE. Go, Mistress Ford.
    Send Quickly to Sir John to know his mind.
                                                  Exit MRS. FORD
    I'll to the Doctor; he hath my good will,
    And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.
    That Slender, though well landed, is an idiot;
    And he my husband best of all affects.
    The Doctor is well money'd, and his friends
    Potent at court; he, none but he, shall have her,
    Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.      Exit
SCENE 5.
The Garter Inn
Enter HOST and SIMPLE
  MRS PAGE. Master Doctor, my daughter is in green; when
    you see your time, take her by the hand, away with her to
    the deanery, and dispatch it quickly. Go before into the
    Park; we two must go together.
  MRS PAGE. Fare you well, sir.  [Exit CAIUS]  My husband
    will not rejoice so much at the abuse of Falstaff as he will
    chafe at the doctor's marrying my daughter; but 'tis no
    matter; better a little chiding than a great deal of
    heartbreak.
  MRS PAGE. They are all couch'd in a pit hard by Heme's
    oak, with obscur'd lights; which, at the very instant of
    Falstaff's and our meeting, they will at once display to the
    night.
  MRS PAGE. If he be not amaz'd, he will be mock'd; if he be  
    amaz'd, he will every way be mock'd.
  MRS PAGE. Against such lewdsters and their lechery,
    Those that betray them do no treachery.
  MRS PAGE. Alas, what noise?
  MRS PAGE. } Away, away.                        [They run off]
  MRS PAGE. I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher.
    Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives?
    See you these, husband? Do not these fair yokes
    Become the forest better than the town?
  MRS PAGE. Why, Sir John, do you think, though we would
    have thrust virtue out of our hearts by the head and
    shoulders, and have given ourselves without scruple to hell,
    that ever the devil could have made you our delight?
  MRS PAGE. A puff'd man?
  MRS PAGE.  [Aside]  Doctors doubt that; if Anne Page be
    my daughter, she is, by this, Doctor Caius' wife.
                        Enter SLENDER
  MRS PAGE. Good George, be not angry. I knew of your
    purpose; turn'd my daughter into green; and, indeed, she
    is now with the Doctor at the dean'ry, and there married.
  
                         Enter CAIUS
  MRS PAGE. Why, did you take her in green?
  MRS PAGE. Why went you not with Master Doctor, maid?
  MRS PAGE. Well, I will muse no further. Master Fenton,
    Heaven give you many, many merry days!
    Good husband, let us every one go home,  
    And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire;
    Sir John and all.
