  Beat. I pray you, is Signior Mountanto return'd from the wars or no?
  Beat. He set up his bills here in Messina and challeng'd Cupid at
    the flight, and my uncle's fool, reading the challenge,
    subscrib'd for Cupid and challeng'd him at the burbolt. I pray
    you, how many hath he kill'd and eaten in these wars? But how
    many hath he kill'd? For indeed I promised to eat all of his
    killing.
  Beat. You had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it. He is a
    very valiant trencherman; he hath an excellent stomach.
  Beat. And a good soldier to a lady; but what is he to a lord?
  Beat. It is so indeed. He is no less than a stuff'd man; but for
    the stuffing--well, we are all mortal.
  Beat. Alas, he gets nothing by that! In our last conflict four of
    his five wits went halting off, and now is the whole man govern'd
    with one; so that if he have wit enough to keep himself warm, let
    him bear it for a difference between himself and his horse; for
    it is all the wealth that he hath left to be known a reasonable
    creature. Who is his companion now? He hath every month a new
    sworn brother.  
  Beat. Very easily possible. He wears his faith but as the fashion
    of his hat; it ever changes with the next block.
  Beat. No. An he were, I would burn my study. But I pray you, who is
    his companion? Is there no young squarer now that will make a
    voyage with him to the devil?
  Beat. O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease! He is sooner
    caught than the pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad. God
    help the noble Claudio! If he have caught the Benedick, it will
    cost him a thousand pound ere 'a be cured.
  Beat. Do, good friend.
  Beat. No, not till a hot January.
  Beat. I wonder that you will still be talking, Signior Benedick.
    Nobody marks you.
  Beat. Is it possible Disdain should die while she hath such meet
    food to feed it as Signior Benedick? Courtesy itself must convert  
    to disdain if you come in her presence.
  Beat. A dear happiness to women! They would else have been troubled
    with a pernicious suitor. I thank God and my cold blood, I am of
    your humour for that. I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow
    than a man swear he loves me.
  Beat. Scratching could not make it worse an 'twere such a face as
    yours were.
  Beat. A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours.
  Beat. You always end with a jade's trick. I know you of old.
  Beat. How tartly that gentleman looks! I never can see him but I am
    heart-burn'd an hour after.
  Beat. He were an excellent man that were made just in the midway
    between him and Benedick. The one is too like an image and says
    nothing, and the other too like my lady's eldest son, evermore
    tattling.
  Beat. With a good leg and a good foot, uncle, and money enough in
    his purse, such a man would win any woman in the world--if 'a
    could get her good will.
  Beat. Too curst is more than curst. I shall lessen God's sending
    that way, for it is said, 'God sends a curst cow short horns,'
    but to a cow too curst he sends none.
  Beat. Just, if he send me no husband; for the which blessing I am
    at him upon my knees every morning and evening. Lord, I could not
    endure a husband with a beard on his face. I had rather lie in
    the woollen!
  Beat. What should I do with him? dress him in my apparel and make
    him my waiting gentlewoman? He that hath a beard is more than a
    youth, and he that hath no beard is less than a man; and he that
    is more than a youth is not for me; and he that is less than a
    man, I am not for him. Therefore I will even take sixpence in
    earnest of the berrord and lead his apes into hell.
  Beat. No; but to the gate, and there will the devil meet me like an
    old cuckold with horns on his head, and say 'Get you to heaven,
    Beatrice, get you to heaven. Here's no place for you maids.' So  
    deliver I up my apes, and away to Saint Peter--for the heavens.
    He shows me where the bachelors sit, and there live we as merry
    as the day is long.
  Beat. Yes faith. It is my cousin's duty to make cursy and say,
    'Father, as it please you.' But yet for all that, cousin, let him
    be a handsome fellow, or else make another cursy, and say,
    'Father, as it please me.'
  Beat. Not till God make men of some other metal than earth. Would
    it not grieve a woman to be overmaster'd with a piece of valiant
    dust? to make an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl?
    No, uncle, I'll none. Adam's sons are my brethren, and truly I
    hold it a sin to match in my kinred.
  Beat. The fault will be in the music, cousin, if you be not wooed
    in good time. If the Prince be too important, tell him there is
    measure in everything, and so dance out the answer. For, hear me,  
    Hero: wooing, wedding, and repenting is as a Scotch jig, a
    measure, and a cinque-pace: the first suit is hot and hasty like
    a Scotch jig--and full as fantastical; the wedding, mannerly
    modest, as a measure, full of state and ancientry; and then comes
    Repentance and with his bad legs falls into the cinque-pace
    faster and faster, till he sink into his grave.
  Beat. I have a good eye, uncle; I can see a church by daylight.
  Beat. Will you not tell me who told you so?
  Beat. Nor will you not tell me who you are?
  Beat. That I was disdainful, and that I had my good wit out of the
    'Hundred Merry Tales.' Well, this was Signior Benedick that said
    so.
  Beat. I am sure you know him well enough.
  Beat. Did he never make you laugh?  
  Beat. Why, he is the Prince's jester, a very dull fool. Only his
    gift is in devising impossible slanders. None but libertines
    delight in him; and the commendation is not in his wit, but in
    his villany; for he both pleases men and angers them, and then
    they laugh at him and beat him. I am sure he is in the fleet.
    I would he had boarded me.
  Beat. Do, do. He'll but break a comparison or two on me; which
    peradventure, not marked or not laugh'd at, strikes him into
    melancholy; and then there's a partridge wing saved, for the fool
    will eat no supper that night.
                                                        [Music.]
    We must follow the leaders.
  Beat. Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at the next
    turning.
        Dance. Exeunt (all but Don John, Borachio, and Claudio].
  Beat. Indeed, my lord, he lent it me awhile, and I gave him use for
    it--a double heart for his single one. Marry, once before he won
    it of me with false dice; therefore your Grace may well say I
    have lost it.
  Beat. So I would not he should do me, my lord, lest I should prove
    the mother of fools. I have brought Count Claudio, whom you sent
    me to seek.
  Beat. The Count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well; but
    civil count--civil as an orange, and something of that jealous
    complexion.
  Beat. Speak, Count, 'tis your cue.
  Beat. Speak, cousin; or, if you cannot, stop his mouth with a kiss
    and let not him speak neither.
  Beat. Yea, my lord; I thank it, poor fool, it keeps on the windy
    side of care. My cousin tells him in his ear that he is in her  
    heart.
  Beat. Good Lord, for alliance! Thus goes every one to the world but
    I, and I am sunburnt. I may sit in a corner and cry 'Heigh-ho for
    a husband!'
  Beat. I would rather have one of your father's getting. Hath your
    Grace ne'er a brother like you? Your father got excellent
    husbands, if a maid could come by them.
  Beat. No, my lord, unless I might have another for working days:
    your Grace is too costly to wear every day. But I beseech your
    Grace pardon me. I was born to speak all mirth and no matter.
  Beat. No, sure, my lord, my mother cried; but then there was a star
    danc'd, and under that was I born. Cousins, God give you joy!
  Beat. I cry you mercy, uncle, By your Grace's pardon.    Exit.
  Beat. Against my will I am sent to bid You come in to dinner.
  Beat. I took no more pains for those thanks than you take pains to
    thank me. If it had been painful, I would not have come.
  Beat. Yea, just so much as you may take upon a knives point, and
    choke a daw withal. You have no stomach, signior. Fare you well.
Exit.
  Beat. What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true?
    Stand I condemn'd for pride and scorn so much?
    Contempt, farewell! and maiden pride, adieu!
    No glory lives behind the back of such.
    And, Benedick, love on; I will requite thee,
    Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand.
    If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee
    To bind our loves up in a holy band;
    For others say thou dost deserve, and I
    Believe it better than reportingly.                    Exit.
Scene II.
A room in Leonato's house.
Enter Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick, and Leonato.
  Beat. Good morrow, sweet Hero.
  Beat. I am out of all other tune, methinks.  
  Beat. Yea, 'Light o' love' with your heels! then, if your husband
    have stables enough, you'll see he shall lack no barnes.
  Beat. 'Tis almost five o'clock, cousin; 'tis time you were ready.
    By my troth, I am exceeding ill. Hey-ho!
  Beat. For the letter that begins them all, H.
  Beat. What means the fool, trow?
  Beat. I am stuff'd, cousin; I cannot smell.
  Beat. O, God help me! God help me! How long have you profess'd
    apprehension?
  Beat. It is not seen enough. You should wear it in your cap. By my
    troth, I am sick.
  Beat. Benedictus? why benedictus? You have some moral in this
    'benedictus.'
  Beat. What pace is this that thy tongue keeps?
  Beat. Why, how now, cousin? Wherefore sink you down?
  Beat. Dead, I think. Help, uncle!  
    Hero! why, Hero! Uncle! Signior Benedick! Friar!
  Beat. How now, cousin Hero?
  Beat. O, on my soul, my cousin is belied!
  Beat. No, truly, not; although, until last night,
    I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow
  Beat. Yea, and I will weep a while longer.
  Beat. You have no reason. I do it freely.
  Beat. Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right
     her!
  Beat. A very even way, but no such friend.
  Beat. It is a man's office, but not yours.
  Beat. As strange as the thing I know not. It were as possible for
    me to say I loved nothing so well as you. But believe me not; and
    yet I lie not. I confess nothing, nor I deny nothing. I am sorry
    for my cousin.
  Beat. Do not swear, and eat it.
  Beat. Will you not eat your word?
  Beat. Why then, God forgive me!
  Beat. You have stayed me in a happy hour. I was about to protest I
    loved you.
  Beat. I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to
    protest.
  Beat. Kill Claudio.
  Beat. You kill me to deny it. Farewell.
  Beat. I am gone, though I am here. There is no love in you. Nay, I
    pray you let me go.
  Beat. In faith, I will go.
  Beat. You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine
    enemy.
  Beat. Is 'a not approved in the height a villain, that hath
    slandered, scorned, dishonoured my kinswoman? O that I were a
    man! What? bear her in hand until they come to take hands, and
    then with public accusation, uncover'd slander, unmitigated
    rancour--O God, that I were a man! I would eat his heart in the
    market place.
  Beat. Talk with a man out at a window!-a proper saying!  
  Beat. Sweet Hero! she is wrong'd, she is sland'red, she is undone.
  Beat. Princes and Counties! Surely a princely testimony, a goodly
    count, Count Comfect, a sweet gallant surely! O that I were a man
    for his sake! or that I had any friend would be a man for my
    sake! But manhood is melted into cursies, valour into compliment,
    and men are only turn'd into tongue, and trim ones too. He is now
    as valiant as Hercules that only tells a lie,and swears it. I
    cannot be a man with wishing; therefore I will die a woman with
    grieving.
  Beat. Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.
  Beat. Yea, as sure is I have a thought or a soul.
  Beat. Yea, signior, and depart when you bid me.
  Beat. 'Then' is spoken. Fare you well now. And yet, ere I go, let
    me go with that I came for, which is, with knowing what hath
    pass'd between you and Claudio.
  Beat. Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul
    breath, and foul breath is noisome. Therefore I will depart
    unkiss'd.
  Beat. For them all together, which maintain'd so politic a state of
    evil that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with
    them. But for which of my good parts did you first suffer love
    for me?
  Beat. In spite of your heart, I think. Alas, poor heart! If you
    spite it for my sake, I will spite it for yours, for I will never
    love that which my friend hates.
  Beat. It appears not in this confession. There's not one wise man
    among twenty, that will praise himself.
  Beat. And how long is that, think you?
  Beat. Very ill.
  Beat. Very ill too.  
  Beat. Will you go hear this news, signior?
  Beat. [unmasks] I answer to that name. What is your will?
  Beat. Why, no; no more than reason.
  Beat. Do not you love me?
  Beat. Why, then my cousin, Margaret, and Ursula
    Are much deceiv'd; for they did swear you did.
  Beat. They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me.
  Beat. No, truly, but in friendly recompense.  
  Beat. I would not deny you; but, by this good day, I yield upon
    great persuasion, and partly to save your life, for I was told
    you were in a consumption.
  Beat. I'll tell thee what, Prince: a college of wit-crackers cannot
    flout me out of my humour. Dost thou think I care for a satire or
    an epigram? No. If a man will be beaten with brains, 'a shall
    wear nothing handsome about him. In brief, since I do purpose to
    marry, I will think nothing to any purpose that the world can say
    against it; and therefore never flout at me for what I have said  
    against it; for man is a giddy thing, and this is my conclusion.
    For thy part, Claudio, I did think to have beaten thee; but in
    that thou art like to be my kinsman, live unbruis'd, and love my
    cousin.
