  ALONSO. Good boatswain, have care. Where's the master?  
    Play the men.
  ALONSO. Prithee, peace.
  ALONSO. I prithee, spare.
  ALONSO. You cram these words into mine ears against
    The stomach of my sense. Would I had never
    Married my daughter there; for, coming thence,
    My son is lost; and, in my rate, she too,
    Who is so far from Italy removed
    I ne'er again shall see her. O thou mine heir
    Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
    Hath made his meal on thee?
  ALONSO. No, no, he's gone.
  ALONSO. Prithee, peace.
  ALONSO. So is the dear'st o' th' loss.
  ALONSO. Prithee, no more; thou dost talk nothing to me.
  ALONSO. What, all so soon asleep! I wish mine eyes
    Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts; I find
    They are inclin'd to do so.
  ALONSO. Thank you-wondrous heavy!
                                     [ALONSO sleeps. Exit ARIEL]
  ALONSO. Why, how now?-Ho, awake!-Why are you drawn?
    Wherefore this ghastly looking?
  ALONSO. I heard nothing.
  ALONSO. Heard you this, Gonzalo?
  ALONSO. Lead off this ground; and let's make further
    search
    For my poor son.
  ALONSO. Lead away.
  ALONSO. Old lord, I cannot blame thee,
    Who am myself attach'd with weariness
    To th' dulling of my spirits; sit down and rest.
    Even here I will put off my hope, and keep it
    No longer for my flatterer; he is drown'd
    Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks
    Our frustrate search on land. Well, let him go.
  ALONSO. What harmony is this? My good friends, hark!
  ALONSO. Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these?
  ALONSO. I cannot too much muse
    Such shapes, such gesture, and such sound, expressing,
    Although they want the use of tongue, a kind
    Of excellent dumb discourse.
  ALONSO. Not I.
  ALONSO. I will stand to, and feed,
    Although my last; no matter, since I feel
    The best is past. Brother, my lord the Duke,
    Stand to, and do as we.
       Thunder and lightning. Enter ARIEL, like a harpy;
       claps his wings upon the table; and, with a quaint
                device, the banquet vanishes  
  ALONSO. O, it is monstrous, monstrous!
    Methought the billows spoke, and told me of it;
    The winds did sing it to me; and the thunder,
    That deep and dreadful organ-pipe, pronounc'd
    The name of Prosper; it did bass my trespass.
    Therefore my son i' th' ooze is bedded; and
    I'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded,
    And with him there lie mudded.                          Exit
  ALONSO. Whe'er thou be'st he or no,
    Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me,
    As late I have been, I not know. Thy pulse
    Beats, as of flesh and blood; and, since I saw thee,
    Th' affliction of my mind amends, with which,
    I fear, a madness held me. This must crave-
    An if this be at all-a most strange story.  
    Thy dukedom I resign, and do entreat
    Thou pardon me my wrongs. But how should Prospero
    Be living and be here?
  ALONSO. If thou beest Prospero,
    Give us particulars of thy preservation;
    How thou hast met us here, whom three hours since
    Were wreck'd upon this shore; where I have lost-
    How sharp the point of this remembrance is!-
    My dear son Ferdinand.
  ALONSO. Irreparable is the loss; and patience
    Says it is past her cure.
  ALONSO. You the like loss!
  ALONSO. A daughter!
    O heavens, that they were living both in Naples,
    The King and Queen there! That they were, I wish
    Myself were mudded in that oozy bed
    Where my son lies. When did you lose your daughter?
  ALONSO. If this prove
    A vision of the island, one dear son
    Shall I twice lose.
  ALONSO. Now all the blessings
    Of a glad father compass thee about!
    Arise, and say how thou cam'st here.
  ALONSO. What is this maid with whom thou wast at play?
    Your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three hours;
    Is she the goddess that hath sever'd us,
    And brought us thus together?
  ALONSO. I am hers.
    But, O, how oddly will it sound that I
    Must ask my child forgiveness!
  ALONSO. I say, Amen, Gonzalo!
  ALONSO.  [To FERDINAND and MIRANDA]  Give me your
    hands.
    Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart
    That doth not wish you joy.
  ALONSO. These are not natural events; they strengthen
    From strange to stranger. Say, how came you hither?
  ALONSO. This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod;
    And there is in this business more than nature
    Was ever conduct of. Some oracle
    Must rectify our knowledge.
  ALONSO. Is not this Stephano, my drunken butler?
  ALONSO. And Trinculo is reeling ripe; where should they
    Find this grand liquor that hath gilded 'em?
    How cam'st thou in this pickle?
  ALONSO.  [Pointing to CALIBAN]  This is as strange a thing
    as e'er I look'd on.  
  ALONSO. Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.
  ALONSO. I long
    To hear the story of your life, which must
    Take the ear strangely.
