  GONZALO. Nay, good, be patient.
  GONZALO. Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.
  GONZALO. I have great comfort from this fellow. Methinks
    he hath no drowning mark upon him; his complexion is  
    perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his hanging;
    make the rope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth
    little advantage. If he be not born to be hang'd, our
    case is miserable.                                    Exeunt
                     Re-enter BOATSWAIN
  GONZALO. I'll warrant him for drowning, though the ship were
    no stronger than a nutshell, and as leaky as an unstanched
    wench.
  GONZALO. The King and Prince at prayers!
    Let's assist them,
    For our case is as theirs.
  GONZALO. He'll be hang'd yet,
    Though every drop of water swear against it,  
    And gape at wid'st to glut him.
    [A confused noise within: Mercy on us!
    We split, we split! Farewell, my wife and children!
    Farewell, brother! We split, we split, we split!]
  GONZALO. Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for
    an acre of barren ground-long heath, brown furze, any
    thing. The wills above be done, but I would fain die
    dry death.                                            Exeunt
SCENE 2
The Island. Before PROSPERO'S cell
Enter PROSPERO and MIRANDA
  GONZALO. Beseech you, sir, be merry; you have cause,
    So have we all, of joy; for our escape
    Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe
    Is common; every day, some sailor's wife,
    The masters of some merchant, and the merchant,
    Have just our theme of woe; but for the miracle,
    I mean our preservation, few in millions
    Can speak like us. Then wisely, good sir, weigh
    Our sorrow with our comfort.
  GONZALO. Sir-
  GONZALO. When every grief is entertain'd that's offer'd,
    Comes to th' entertainer-
  GONZALO. Dolour comes to him, indeed; you have spoken
    truer than you purpos'd.
  GONZALO. Therefore, my lord-
  GONZALO. Well, I have done; but yet-
  GONZALO. Here is everything advantageous to life.
  GONZALO. How lush and lusty the grass looks! how green!
  GONZALO. But the rarity of it is, which is indeed almost
    beyond credit-
  GONZALO. That our garments, being, as they were, drench'd
    in the sea, hold, notwithstanding, their freshness and
    glosses, being rather new-dy'd, than stain'd with salt
    water.
  GONZALO. Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when
    we put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of the
    King's fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.
  GONZALO. Not since widow Dido's time.  
  GONZALO. This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.
  GONZALO. I assure you, Carthage.
  GONZALO. Ay.
  GONZALO. Sir, we were talking that our garments seem now
    as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage of  
    your daughter, who is now Queen.
  GONZALO. Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I
    wore it? I mean, in a sort.
  GONZALO. When I wore it at your daughter's marriage?
  GONZALO. My lord Sebastian,
    The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness,
    And time to speak it in; you rub the sore,
    When you should bring the plaster.
  GONZALO. It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
    When you are cloudy.
  GONZALO. Had I plantation of this isle, my lord-
  GONZALO. And were the king on't, what would I do?
  GONZALO. I' th' commonwealth I would by contraries
    Execute all things; for no kind of traffic
    Would I admit; no name of magistrate;  
    Letters should not be known; riches, poverty,
    And use of service, none; contract, succession,
    Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none;
    No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil;
    No occupation; all men idle, all;
    And women too, but innocent and pure;
    No sovereignty-
  GONZALO. All things in common nature should produce
    Without sweat or endeavour. Treason, felony,
    Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,
    Would I not have; but nature should bring forth,
    Of it own kind, all foison, all abundance,
    To feed my innocent people.
  GONZALO. I would with such perfection govern, sir,
    T' excel the golden age.  
  GONZALO. And-do you mark me, sir?
  GONZALO. I do well believe your Highness; and did it to
    minister occasion to these gentlemen, who are of such
    sensible and nimble lungs that they always use to laugh
    at nothing.
  GONZALO. Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to
    you; so you may continue, and laugh at nothing still.
  GONZALO. You are gentlemen of brave mettle; you would
    lift the moon out of her sphere, if she would continue
    in it five weeks without changing.
          Enter ARIEL, invisible, playing solemn music
  GONZALO. No, I warrant you; I will not adventure my
    discretion so weakly. Will you laugh me asleep, for I am
    very heavy?
  GONZALO. Now, good angels
    Preserve the King!                               [They wake]
  GONZALO. What's the matter?  
  GONZALO. Upon mine honour, sir, I heard a humming,
    And that a strange one too, which did awake me;
    I shak'd you, sir, and cried; as mine eyes open'd,
    I saw their weapons drawn-there was a noise,
    That's verily. 'Tis best we stand upon our guard,
    Or that we quit this place. Let's draw our weapons.
  GONZALO. Heavens keep him from these beasts!
    For he is, sure, i' th' island.  
  GONZALO. By'r lakin, I can go no further, sir;
    My old bones ache. Here's a maze trod, indeed,
    Through forth-rights and meanders! By your patience,
    I needs must rest me.
  GONZALO. Marvellous sweet music!
  GONZALO. If in Naples
    I should report this now, would they believe me?
    If I should say, I saw such islanders,
    For certes these are people of the island,
    Who though they are of monstrous shape yet, note,
    Their manners are more gentle-kind than of
    Our human generation you shall find
    Many, nay, almost any.
  GONZALO. Faith, sir, you need not fear. When we were boys,
    Who would believe that there were mountaineers,
    Dewlapp'd like bulls, whose throats had hanging at 'em
    Wallets of flesh? or that there were such men
    Whose heads stood in their breasts? which now we find
    Each putter-out of five for one will bring us
    Good warrant of.
  GONZALO. I' th' name of something holy, sir, why stand you
    In this strange stare?
  GONZALO. All three of them are desperate; their great guilt,
    Like poison given to work a great time after,
    Now gins to bite the spirits. I do beseech you,
    That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly,
    And hinder them from what this ecstasy
    May now provoke them to.
  GONZALO. All torment, trouble, wonder and amazement,
    Inhabits here. Some heavenly power guide us
    Out of this fearful country!
  GONZALO. Whether this be
    Or be not, I'll not swear.
  GONZALO. I have inly wept,
    Or should have spoke ere this. Look down, you gods,
    And on this couple drop a blessed crown;
    For it is you that have chalk'd forth the way
    Which brought us hither.
  GONZALO. Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue
    Should become Kings of Naples? O, rejoice
    Beyond a common joy, and set it down
    With gold on lasting pillars: in one voyage
    Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis;
    And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife
    Where he himself was lost; Prospero his dukedom  
    In a poor isle; and all of us ourselves
    When no man was his own.
  GONZALO. Be it so. Amen!
           Re-enter ARIEL, with the MASTER and BOATSWAIN
                     amazedly following
    O look, sir; look, sir! Here is more of us!
    I prophesied, if a gallows were on land,
    This fellow could not drown. Now, blasphemy,
    That swear'st grace o'erboard, not an oath on shore?
    Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?
