  PROVOST. I do it not in evil disposition,
    But from Lord Angelo by special charge.
  PROVOST. Away, sir; you must go.
  PROVOST. Here, if it like your honour.
  PROVOST. Pray you do. [Exit SERVANT] I'll know
    His pleasure; may be he will relent. Alas,
    He hath but as offended in a dream!
    All sects, all ages, smack of this vice; and he
    To die for 't!
                            Enter ANGELO
  PROVOST. Is it your will Claudio shall die to-morrow?
  PROVOST. Lest I might be too rash;
    Under your good correction, I have seen
    When, after execution, judgment hath  
    Repented o'er his doom.
  PROVOST. I crave your honour's pardon.
    What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?
    She's very near her hour.
  PROVOST. Ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid,
    And to be shortly of a sisterhood,
    If not already.
  PROVOST. [Going] Save your honour!
  PROVOST. [Aside] Heaven give thee moving graces.
  PROVOST. [Aside] Pray heaven she win him.
  PROVOST. I am the Provost. What's your will, good friar?
  PROVOST. I would do more than that, if more were needful.
                          Enter JULIET
    Look, here comes one; a gentlewoman of mine,
    Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
    Hath blister'd her report. She is with child;
    And he that got it, sentenc'd- a young man
    More fit to do another such offence  
    Than die for this.
  PROVOST. As I do think, to-morrow.
    [To JULIET] I have provided for you; stay awhile
    And you shall be conducted.
  PROVOST. 'Tis pity of him.                              Exeunt
SCENE IV.
ANGELO'S house
Enter ANGELO
  PROVOST. Who's there? Come in; the wish deserves a welcome.
  PROVOST. And very welcome. Look, signior, here's your sister.
  PROVOST. As many as you please.
  PROVOST. What's your will, father?
  PROVOST. In good time.                            Exit PROVOST
  PROVOST. A bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please your
    honour.
  PROVOST. So please you, this friar hath been with him, and advis'd
    him for th' entertainment of death.
  PROVOST. Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man's head?
  PROVOST. Come, sir, leave me your snatches and yield me a direct
    answer. To-morrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine. Here
    is in our prison a common executioner, who in his office lacks a
    helper; if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall redeem
    you from your gyves; if not, you shall have your full time of
    imprisonment, and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping, for
    you have been a notorious bawd.
  PROVOST. What ho, Abhorson! Where's Abhorson there?
                          Enter ABHORSON  
  PROVOST. Sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in your
    execution. If you think it meet, compound with him by the year,
    and let him abide here with you; if not, use him for the present,
    and dismiss him. He cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath
    been a bawd.
  PROVOST. Go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will turn the
    scale.                                                  Exit
  PROVOST. Are you agreed?
  PROVOST. You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe to-morrow
    four o'clock.
  PROVOST. Call hither Barnardine and Claudio.
                                      Exeunt ABHORSON and POMPEY
    Th' one has my pity; not a jot the other,
    Being a murderer, though he were my brother.  
                           Enter CLAUDIO
    Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death;
    'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
    Thou must be made immortal. Where's Barnardine?
  PROVOST. Who can do good on him?
    Well, go, prepare yourself. [Knocking within] But hark, what
      noise?
    Heaven give your spirits comfort!               Exit CLAUDIO
    [Knocking continues] By and by.
    I hope it is some pardon or reprieve
    For the most gentle Claudio.
                 Enter DUKE, disguised as before
    Welcome, father.  
  PROVOST. None, since the curfew rung.
  PROVOST. No.
  PROVOST. What comfort is for Claudio?
  PROVOST. It is a bitter deputy.
  PROVOST. There he must stay until the officer
    Arise to let him in; he is call'd up.
  PROVOST. None, sir, none.
  PROVOST. Happily
    You something know; yet I believe there comes
    No countermand; no such example have we.
    Besides, upon the very siege of justice,
    Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
    Profess'd the contrary.
                         Enter a MESSENGER  
    This is his lordship's man.
  PROVOST. I shall obey him.                      Exit MESSENGER
  PROVOST. I told you: Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss in mine
    office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks
    strangely, for he hath not us'd it before.
  PROVOST. [Reads] 'Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let
    Claudio be executed by four of the clock, and, in the afternoon,  
    Barnardine. For my better satisfaction, let me have Claudio's
    head sent me by five. Let this be duly performed, with a thought
    that more depends on it than we must yet deliver. Thus fail not
    to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.'
    What say you to this, sir?
  PROVOST. A Bohemian born; but here nurs'd up and bred.
    One that is a prisoner nine years old.
  PROVOST. His friends still wrought reprieves for him; and, indeed,
    his fact, till now in the government of Lord Angelo, came not to
    an undoubted proof.
  PROVOST. Most manifest, and not denied by himself.
  PROVOST. A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a  
    drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless, of what's past,
    present, or to come; insensible of mortality and desperately
    mortal.
  PROVOST. He will hear none. He hath evermore had the liberty of the
    prison; give him leave to escape hence, he would not; drunk many
    times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. We have very oft
    awak'd him, as if to carry him to execution, and show'd him a
    seeming warrant for it; it hath not moved him at all.
  PROVOST. Pray, sir, in what?
  PROVOST. Alack! How may I do it, having the hour limited, and an  
    express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view
    of Angelo? I may make my case as Claudio's, to cross this in the
    smallest.
  PROVOST. Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.
  PROVOST. Pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.
  PROVOST. To him and to his substitutes.
  PROVOST. But what likelihood is in that?
  PROVOST. I know them both.
  PROVOST. Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
  PROVOST. Here in the prison, father,
    There died this morning of a cruel fever
    One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,  
    A man of Claudio's years; his beard and head
    Just of his colour. What if we do omit
    This reprobate till he were well inclin'd,
    And satisfy the deputy with the visage
    Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?
  PROVOST. This shall be done, good father, presently.
    But Barnardine must die this afternoon;
    And how shall we continue Claudio,
    To save me from the danger that might come
    If he were known alive?
  PROVOST. I am your free dependant.
  PROVOST. Here is the head; I'll carry it myself.
  PROVOST. I'll make all speed.                             Exit  
  PROVOST. It was commanded so.
  PROVOST. No, my good lord; it was by private message.
  PROVOST. Pardon me, noble lord;
    I thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
    Yet did repent me, after more advice;
    For testimony whereof, one in the prison,
    That should by private order else have died,
    I have reserv'd alive.  
  PROVOST. His name is Barnardine.
  PROVOST. This, my lord.
  PROVOST. This is another prisoner that I sav'd,
    Who should have died when Claudio lost his head;
    As like almost to Claudio as himself.    [Unmuffles CLAUDIO]
