  Lady. I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
    To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.
  Lady. [within] Ho, daughter! are you up?
  Lady. Why, how now, Juliet?
  Lady. Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
    What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
    An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
    Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
    But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
  Lady. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
    Which you weep for.
  Lady. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
    As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
  Lady. That same villain Romeo.
  Lady. That is because the traitor murderer lives.  
  Lady. We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
    Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
    Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
    Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram
    That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;
    And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
  Lady. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
    But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.  
  Lady. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
    One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
    Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
    That thou expects not nor I look'd not for.
  Lady. Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
    The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
    The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
    Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
  Lady. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,  
    And see how be will take it at your hands.
                   Enter Capulet and Nurse.
  Lady. Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
    I would the fool were married to her grave!
  Lady. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
  Lady. You are too hot.
  Lady. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
    Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.            Exit.
  Lady. Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
  Lady. Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
    But I will watch you from such watching now.
                                          Exeunt Lady and Nurse.  
