  COSTARD. Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.
  COSTARD. The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta.
    The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.
  COSTARD. In manner and form following, sir; all those three: I was
    seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with her upon the form,
    and taken following her into the park; which, put together, is in
    manner and form following. Now, sir, for the manner- it is the
    manner of a man to speak to a woman. For the form- in some form.
  COSTARD. As it shall follow in my correction; and God defend the
    right!
  COSTARD. Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.
  COSTARD. Not a word of Costard yet.  
  COSTARD. It may be so; but if he say it is so, he is, in telling
    true, but so.
  COSTARD. Be to me, and every man that dares not fight!
  COSTARD. Of other men's secrets, I beseech you.
  COSTARD. Me?
  COSTARD. Me?
  COSTARD. Still me?
  COSTARD. O, me!
  COSTARD. With a wench.
    King. 'with a child of our grandmother Eve, a female; or, for thy
    more sweet understanding, a woman. Him I, as my ever-esteemed
    duty pricks me on, have sent to thee, to receive the meed of
    punishment, by thy sweet Grace's officer, Antony Dull, a man of
    good repute, carriage, bearing, and estimation.'
  COSTARD. Sir, I confess the wench.
  COSTARD. I do confess much of the hearing it, but little of the
    marking of it.
  COSTARD. I was taken with none, sir; I was taken with a damsel.
  COSTARD. This was no damsel neither, sir; she was a virgin.
  COSTARD. If it were, I deny her virginity; I was taken with a maid.  
  COSTARD. This maid will serve my turn, sir.
  COSTARD. I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
  COSTARD. I suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is I was taken
    with Jaquenetta, and Jaquenetta is a true girl; and therefore
    welcome the sour cup of prosperity! Affliction may one day smile
    again; and till then, sit thee down, sorrow.
                                                          Exeunt
SCENE II.
The park
Enter ARMADO and MOTH, his page
  COSTARD. Well, sir, I hope when I do it I shall do it on a full
    stomach.
  COSTARD. I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they are but
    lightly rewarded.
  COSTARD. Let me not be pent up, sir; I will fast, being loose.
  COSTARD. Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation that I
    have seen, some shall see.  
  COSTARD. Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon. It is
    not for prisoners to be too silent in their words, and therefore
    I will say nothing. I thank God I have as little patience as
    another man, and therefore I can be quiet.
                                         Exeunt MOTH and COSTARD
  COSTARD. No egma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in the mail, sir.
    O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain; no l'envoy, no l'envoy; no
    salve, sir, but a plantain!
  COSTARD. The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat.
    Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.
    To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose;
    Let me see: a fat l'envoy; ay, that's a fat goose.
  COSTARD. True, and I for a plantain. Thus came your argument in;
    Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought;
    And he ended the market.
  COSTARD. Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth; I will speak that
      l'envoy.
    I, Costard, running out, that was safely within,
    Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
  COSTARD. Till there be more matter in the shin.
  COSTARD. O, Marry me to one Frances! I smell some l'envoy, some
    goose, in this.
  COSTARD. True, true; and now you will be my purgation, and let me
    loose.
  COSTARD. My sweet ounce of man's flesh, my incony Jew!
                                                       Exit MOTH
    Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration! O, that's the
    Latin word for three farthings. Three farthings- remuneration.
    'What's the price of this inkle?'- 'One penny.'- 'No, I'll give
    you a remuneration.' Why, it carries it. Remuneration! Why, it is
    a fairer name than French crown. I will never buy and sell out of
    this word.
                          Enter BEROWNE
  COSTARD. Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man buy for
    a remuneration?
  COSTARD. Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.
  COSTARD. I thank your worship. God be wi' you!
  COSTARD. When would you have it done, sir?
  COSTARD. Well, I will do it, sir; fare you well.
  COSTARD. I shall know, sir, when I have done it.
  COSTARD. I will come to your worship to-morrow morning.
  COSTARD. Gardon, O sweet gardon! better than remuneration; a
    'leven-pence farthing better; most sweet gardon! I will do it,
    sir, in print. Gardon- remuneration!                    Exit
  COSTARD. God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?
  COSTARD. Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
  COSTARD. The thickest and the tallest! It is so; truth is truth.
    An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
    One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.
    Are not you the chief woman? You are the thickest here.  
  COSTARD. I have a letter from Monsieur Berowne to one
    Lady Rosaline.
  COSTARD. I told you: my lord.
  COSTARD. From my lord to my lady.
  COSTARD. From my Lord Berowne, a good master of mine,
    To a lady of France that he call'd Rosaline.
  COSTARD. By my troth, most pleasant! How both did fit it!
  COSTARD. Indeed, 'a must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the
    clout.
  COSTARD. Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.
  COSTARD. She's too hard for you at pricks, sir; challenge her to
    bowl.
  COSTARD. By my soul, a swain, a most simple clown!
    Lord, Lord! how the ladies and I have put him down!
    O' my troth, most sweet jests, most incony vulgar wit!
    When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it were, so fit.
    Armado a th' t'one side- O, a most dainty man!
    To see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
    To see him kiss his hand, and how most sweetly 'a will swear!
    And his page a t' other side, that handful of wit!
    Ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit!
    Sola, sola!                                     Exit COSTARD
SCENE II.
The park
From the shooting within, enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL
  COSTARD. Marry, Master Schoolmaster, he that is likest to a
    hogshead.
  COSTARD. Have with thee, my girl.
                                   Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA
  COSTARD. Some certain treason.
  COSTARD. Nay, it makes nothing, sir.
  COSTARD. Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.
                                      [BEROWNE tears the letter]
  COSTARD. Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
                                   Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA
  COSTARD. O, they have liv'd long on the alms-basket of words. I
    marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word, for thou are
    not so long by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibus; thou art
    easier swallowed than a flap-dragon.
  COSTARD. An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst have it
    to buy ginger-bread. Hold, there is the very remuneration I had
    of thy master, thou halfpenny purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg of
    discretion. O, an the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but
    my bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me! Go to;
    thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers' ends, as they say.
  COSTARD. O Lord, sir, they would know
     Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no?
  COSTARD. No, sir; but it is vara fine,
    For every one pursents three.
  COSTARD. Not so, sir; under correction, sir,
    I hope it is not so.
    You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir; we know what we
      know;
    I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir-
  COSTARD. Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.
  COSTARD. O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living by  
    reck'ning, sir.
  COSTARD. O Lord, sir, the parties themselves, the actors, sir, will
    show whereuntil it doth amount. For mine own part, I am, as they
    say, but to parfect one man in one poor man, Pompion the Great,
    sir.
  COSTARD. It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompey the Great;
    for mine own part, I know not the degree of the Worthy; but I am
    to stand for him.
  COSTARD. We will turn it finely off, sir; we will take some care.
                                                    Exit COSTARD
  COSTARD. I Pompey am-
  COSTARD. I Pompey am-
  COSTARD. I Pompey am, Pompey surnam'd the Big-  
   DUMAIN. The Great.
  COSTARD. It is Great, sir.
    Pompey surnam'd the Great,
    That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make my foe to
      sweat;
    And travelling along this coast, I bere am come by chance,
    And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France.
    If your ladyship would say 'Thanks, Pompey,' I had done.
  COSTARD. It is Great, sir.
    Pompey surnam'd the Great,
    That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make my foe to
      sweat;
    And travelling along this coast, I bere am come by chance,
    And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France.
    If your ladyship would say 'Thanks, Pompey,' I had done.
  COSTARD. 'Tis not so much worth; but I hope I was perfect.
    I made a little fault in Great.
  COSTARD. Your servant, and Costard.
  COSTARD. [To Sir Nathaniel] O, Sir, you have overthrown Alisander
    the conqueror! You will be scrap'd out of the painted cloth for
    this. Your lion, that holds his poleaxe sitting on a close-stool,
    will be given to Ajax. He will be the ninth Worthy. A conqueror
    and afeard to speak! Run away for shame, Alisander.
    [Sir Nathaniel retires] There, an't shall please you, a foolish
    mild man; an honest man, look you, and soon dash'd. He is a
    marvellous good neighbour, faith, and a very good bowler; but for
    Alisander- alas! you see how 'tis- a little o'erparted. But there
    are Worthies a-coming will speak their mind in some other sort.
  COSTARD. The party is gone, fellow Hector, she is gone; she is two
    months on her way.
  COSTARD. Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor wench
    is cast away. She's quick; the child brags in her belly already;
    'tis yours.
  COSTARD. Then shall Hector be whipt for Jaquenetta that is quick by
    him, and hang'd for Pompey that is dead by him.
  COSTARD. I will not fight with a pole, like a Northern man; I'll
    slash; I'll do it by the sword. I bepray you, let me borrow my
    arms again.
  COSTARD. I'll do it in my shirt.
