  ALENCON. They want their porridge and their fat bull
    beeves.
    Either they must be dieted like mules
    And have their provender tied to their mouths,
    Or piteous they will look, like drowned mice.
  ALENCON. Froissart, a countryman of ours, records
    England all Olivers and Rowlands bred  
    During the time Edward the Third did reign.
    More truly now may this be verified;
    For none but Samsons and Goliases
    It sendeth forth to skirmish. One to ten!
    Lean raw-bon'd rascals! Who would e'er suppose
    They had such courage and audacity?
  ALENCON. Be it so.
                   Enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANS
  ALENCON. Doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock;
    Else ne'er could he so long protract his speech.  
  ALENCON. He may mean more than we poor men do know;
    These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.
  ALENCON. Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.
  ALENCON. All France will be replete with mirth and joy
    When they shall hear how we have play'd the men.
  ALENCON. How now, my lords? What, all unready so?
  ALENCON. Of all exploits since first I follow'd arms
    Ne'er heard I of a warlike enterprise
    More venturous or desperate than this.
  ALENCON. Here cometh Charles; I marvel how he sped.
                    Enter CHARLES and LA PUCELLE
  ALENCON. Had all your quarters been as safely kept
    As that whereof I had the government,
    We had not been thus shamefully surpris'd.
  ALENCON. By thrusting out a torch from yonder tower;
    Which once discern'd shows that her meaning is
    No way to that, for weakness, which she ent'red.
             Enter LA PUCELLE, on the top, thrusting out
                         a torch burning
  
  ALENCON. Defer no time, delays have dangerous ends;
    Enter, and cry 'The Dauphin!' presently,
    And then do execution on the watch. Alarum.           Exeunt
              An alarum. Enter TALBOT in an excursion
  ALENCON. Signior, no.
  ALENCON. For ever should they be expuls'd from France,
    And not have tide of an earldom here.
  ALENCON. Pucelle hath bravely play'd her part in this,
    And doth deserve a coronet of gold.
  ALENCON. Then march to Paris, royal Charles of France,
    And keep not back your powers in dalliance.
  ALENCON. Must he be then as shadow of himself?
    Adorn his temples with a coronet
    And yet, in substance and authority,
    Retain but privilege of a private man?
    This proffer is absurd and reasonless.
  ALENCON.  [To CHARLES]  To say the truth, it is your policy
    To save your subjects from such massacre
    And ruthless slaughters as are daily seen
    By our proceeding in hostility;
    And therefore take this compact of a truce,
    Although you break it when your pleasure serves.
