  DERBY. God make your Majesty joyful as you have been.
  DERBY. I do beseech you, either not believe
    The envious slanders of her false accusers;
    Or, if she be accus'd on true report,
    Bear with her weakness, which I think proceeds
    From wayward sickness and no grounded malice.
  DERBY. But now the Duke of Buckingham and I
    Are come from visiting his Majesty.
  DERBY. A boon, my sovereign, for my service done!
  DERBY. I Will not rise unless your Highness hear me.
  DERBY. The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life;
    Who slew to-day a riotous gentleman
    Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.
  DERBY. My lord, good morrow; good morrow, Catesby.
    You may jest on, but, by the holy rood,
    I do not like these several councils, I.
  DERBY. The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from
    London,
    Were jocund and suppos'd their states were sure,  
    And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;
    But yet you see how soon the day o'ercast.
    This sudden stab of rancour I misdoubt;
    Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward.
    What, shall we toward the Tower? The day is spent.
  DERBY. They, for their truth, might better wear their
    heads
    Than some that have accus'd them wear their hats.
    But come, my lord, let's away.
                 Enter HASTINGS, a pursuivant
  DERBY. It is, and wants but nomination.
  DERBY. We have not yet set down this day of triumph.
    To-morrow, in my judgment, is too sudden;
    For I myself am not so well provided
    As else I would be, were the day prolong'd.
  
                    Re-enter the BISHOP OF ELY
  DERBY. What of his heart perceive you in his face
    By any livelihood he show'd to-day?
  DERBY. Let me but meet you, ladies, one hour hence,
    And I'll salute your Grace of York as mother
    And reverend looker-on of two fair queens.
    [To ANNE]  Come, madam, you must straight to
    Westminster,
    There to be crowned Richard's royal queen.
  DERBY. Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.
    Take all the swift advantage of the hours;
    You shall have letters from me to my son
    In your behalf, to meet you on the way.
    Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.
  DERBY. Come, madam, come; I in all haste was sent.
  DERBY. Know, my loving lord,
    The Marquis Dorset, as I hear, is fled
    To Richmond, in the parts where he abides.    [Stands apart]
  DERBY. None good, my liege, to please you with  
    the hearing;
    Nor none so bad but well may be reported.
  DERBY. Richmond is on the seas.
  DERBY. I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.
  DERBY. Stirr'd up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,
    He makes for England here to claim the crown.
  DERBY. Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.
  DERBY. No, my good lord; therefore mistrust me not.
  DERBY. No, my good lord, my friends are in the north.
  DERBY. They have not been commanded, mighty King.
    Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave,
    I'll muster up my friends and meet your Grace
    Where and what time your Majesty shall please.
  DERBY. Most mighty sovereign,
    You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful.  
    I never was nor never will be false.
  DERBY. So deal with him as I prove true to you.         Exit
                          Enter a MESSENGER
  DERBY. Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:
    That in the sty of the most deadly boar
    My son George Stanley is frank'd up in hold;
    If I revolt, off goes young George's head;
    The fear of that holds off my present aid.
    So, get thee gone; commend me to thy lord.
    Withal say that the Queen hath heartily consented
    He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
    But tell me, where is princely Richmond now?
  DERBY. What men of name resort to him?
  DERBY. Well, hie thee to thy lord; I kiss his hand;
    My letter will resolve him of my mind.
    Farewell.                                             Exeunt
ACT V. SCENE 1.
Salisbury. An open place
Enter the SHERIFF and guard, with BUCKINGHAM, led to execution
  DERBY. Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!
  DERBY. I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother,
    Who prays continually for Richmond's good.
    So much for that. The silent hours steal on,
    And flaky darkness breaks within the east.
    In brief, for so the season bids us be,
    Prepare thy battle early in the morning,
    And put thy fortune to the arbitrement
    Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.
    I, as I may-that which I would I cannot-  
    With best advantage will deceive the time
    And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms;
    But on thy side I may not be too forward,
    Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,
    Be executed in his father's sight.
    Farewell; the leisure and the fearful time
    Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love
    And ample interchange of sweet discourse
    Which so-long-sund'red friends should dwell upon.
    God give us leisure for these rites of love!
    Once more, adieu; be valiant, and speed well!
  DERBY. Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee!
    Lo, here, this long-usurped royalty
    From the dead temples of this bloody wretch
    Have I pluck'd off, to grace thy brows withal.
    Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
  DERBY. He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town,
    Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
  DERBY. John Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord Ferrers,
    Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.
