  CLOTEN. If my shirt were bloody, then to shift it. Have I hurt him?
  CLOTEN. The villain would not stand me.
  CLOTEN. I would they had not come between us.  
  CLOTEN. And that she should love this fellow, and refuse me!
  CLOTEN. Come, I'll to my chamber. Would there had been some hurt
    done!
  CLOTEN. You'll go with us?
  CLOTEN. Nay, come, let's go together.
  CLOTEN. Was there ever man had such luck! When I kiss'd the jack,
    upon an up-cast to be hit away! I had a hundred pound on't; and
    then a whoreson jackanapes must take me up for swearing, as if I
    borrowed mine oaths of him, and might not spend them at my
    pleasure.
  CLOTEN. When a gentleman is dispos'd to swear, it is not for any
    standers-by to curtail his oaths. Ha?
  CLOTEN. Whoreson dog! I give him satisfaction? Would he had been
    one of my rank!
  CLOTEN. I am not vex'd more at anything in th' earth. A pox on't! I
    had rather not be so noble as I am; they dare not fight with me,  
    because of the Queen my mother. Every jackslave hath his bellyful
    of fighting, and I must go up and down like a cock that nobody
    can match.
  CLOTEN. Sayest thou?
  CLOTEN. No, I know that; but it is fit I should commit offence to
    my inferiors.
  CLOTEN. Why, so I say.
  CLOTEN. A stranger, and I not known on't?
  CLOTEN. Leonatus? A banish'd rascal; and he's another, whatsoever  
    he be. Who told you of this stranger?
  CLOTEN. Is it fit I went to look upon him? Is there no derogation
    in't?
  CLOTEN. Not easily, I think.
  CLOTEN. Come, I'll go see this Italian. What I have lost to-day at
    bowls I'll win to-night of him. Come, go.
  CLOTEN. It would make any man cold to lose.
  CLOTEN. Winning will put any man into courage. If I could get this
    foolish Imogen, I should have gold enough. It's almost morning,
    is't not?
  CLOTEN. I would this music would come. I am advised to give her
    music a mornings; they say it will penetrate.
                       Enter musicians
    Come on, tune. If you can penetrate her with your fingering, so.
    We'll try with tongue too. If none will do, let her remain; but  
    I'll never give o'er. First, a very excellent good-conceited
    thing; after, a wonderful sweet air, with admirable rich words to
    it- and then let her consider.
                 SONG
      Hark, hark! the lark at heaven's gate sings,
        And Phoebus 'gins arise,
      His steeds to water at those springs
        On chalic'd flow'rs that lies;
      And winking Mary-buds begin
        To ope their golden eyes.
      With everything that pretty bin,
        My lady sweet, arise;
          Arise, arise!
    So, get you gone. If this penetrate, I will consider your music
    the better; if it do not, it is a vice in her ears which
    horsehairs and calves' guts, nor the voice of unpaved eunuch to
    boot, can never amend.                      Exeunt musicians  
                    Enter CYMBELINE and QUEEN
  CLOTEN. I am glad I was up so late, for that's the reason I was up
    so early. He cannot choose but take this service I have done
    fatherly.- Good morrow to your Majesty and to my gracious mother.
  CLOTEN. I have assail'd her with musics, but she vouchsafes no
    notice.
  CLOTEN. Senseless? Not so.
                    Enter a MESSENGER
  CLOTEN. If she be up, I'll speak with her; if not,
    Let her lie still and dream. By your leave, ho!     [Knocks]
    I know her women are about her; what
    If I do line one of their hands? 'Tis gold
    Which buys admittance; oft it doth-yea, and makes
    Diana's rangers false themselves, yield up
    Their deer to th' stand o' th' stealer; and 'tis gold
    Which makes the true man kill'd and saves the thief;
    Nay, sometime hangs both thief and true man. What
    Can it not do and undo? I will make
    One of her women lawyer to me, for
    I yet not understand the case myself.
    By your leave.                                      [Knocks]
                            Enter a LADY
  CLOTEN. A gentleman.
  CLOTEN. Yes, and a gentlewoman's son.
  CLOTEN. Your lady's person; is she ready?
  CLOTEN. There is gold for you; sell me your good report.
  CLOTEN. Good morrow, fairest sister. Your sweet hand.
                                                       Exit LADY
  CLOTEN. Still I swear I love you.  
  CLOTEN. This is no answer.
  CLOTEN. To leave you in your madness 'twere my sin;
    I will not.
  CLOTEN. Do you call me fool?
  CLOTEN. You sin against
    Obedience, which you owe your father. For
    The contract you pretend with that base wretch,
    One bred of alms and foster'd with cold dishes,
    With scraps o' th' court- it is no contract, none.
    And though it be allowed in meaner parties-
    Yet who than he more mean?- to knit their souls-
    On whom there is no more dependency
    But brats and beggary- in self-figur'd knot,
    Yet you are curb'd from that enlargement by
    The consequence o' th' crown, and must not foil
    The precious note of it with a base slave,
    A hilding for a livery, a squire's cloth,
    A pantler- not so eminent!
  CLOTEN. The south fog rot him!
  CLOTEN. 'His garments'! Now the devil-
  CLOTEN. 'His garment'!
  CLOTEN. You have abus'd me.
    'His meanest garment'!
  CLOTEN. I will inform your father.
  CLOTEN. I'll be reveng'd.
    'His mean'st garment'! Well.                            Exit
SCENE IV.
Rome. PHILARIO'S house
Enter POSTHUMUS and PHILARIO
  CLOTEN. There be many Caesars
    Ere such another Julius. Britain is
    A world by itself, and we will nothing pay
    For wearing our own noses.  
  CLOTEN. Come, there's no more tribute to be paid. Our kingdom is
    stronger than it was at that time; and, as I said, there is no
    moe such Caesars. Other of them may have crook'd noses; but to
    owe such straight arms, none.
  CLOTEN. We have yet many among us can gripe as hard as Cassibelan.
    I do not say I am one; but I have a hand. Why tribute? Why should
    we pay tribute? If Caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket,
    or put the moon in his pocket, we will pay him tribute for light;
    else, sir, no more tribute, pray you now.
  CLOTEN. We do.
  CLOTEN. His majesty bids you welcome. Make pastime with us a day or
    two, or longer. If you seek us afterwards in other terms, you
    shall find us in our salt-water girdle. If you beat us out of it,
    it is yours; if you fall in the adventure, our crows shall fare
    the better for you; and there's an end.
  CLOTEN. Receive it friendly; but from this time forth  
    I wear it as your enemy.
  CLOTEN. 'Tis all the better;
    Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it.
  CLOTEN. That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant,
    I have not seen these two days.
  CLOTEN. 'Tis certain she is fled.
    Go in and cheer the King. He rages; none
    Dare come about him.
  CLOTEN. I love and hate her; for she's fair and royal,
    And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite
    Than lady, ladies, woman. From every one
    The best she hath, and she, of all compounded,
    Outsells them all. I love her therefore; but
    Disdaining me and throwing favours on  
    The low Posthumus slanders so her judgment
    That what's else rare is chok'd; and in that point
    I will conclude to hate her, nay, indeed,
    To be reveng'd upon her. For when fools
    Shall-
                    Enter PISANIO
    Who is here? What, are you packing, sirrah?
    Come hither. Ah, you precious pander! Villain,
    Where is thy lady? In a word, or else
    Thou art straightway with the fiends.
  CLOTEN. Where is thy lady? or, by Jupiter-
    I will not ask again. Close villain,
    I'll have this secret from thy heart, or rip
    Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus?
    From whose so many weights of baseness cannot
    A dram of worth be drawn.
  CLOTEN. Where is she, sir? Come nearer.
    No farther halting! Satisfy me home
    What is become of her.
  CLOTEN. All-worthy villain!
    Discover where thy mistress is at once,
    At the next word. No more of 'worthy lord'!
    Speak, or thy silence on the instant is
    Thy condemnation and thy death.
  CLOTEN. Let's see't. I will pursue her
    Even to Augustus' throne.
  CLOTEN. Humh!  
  CLOTEN. Sirrah, is this letter true?
  CLOTEN. It is Posthumus' hand; I know't. Sirrah, if thou wouldst
    not be a villain, but do me true service, undergo those
    employments wherein I should have cause to use thee with a
    serious industry- that is, what villainy soe'er I bid thee do, to
    perform it directly and truly- I would think thee an honest man;
    thou shouldst neither want my means for thy relief nor my voice
    for thy preferment.
  CLOTEN. Wilt thou serve me? For since patiently and constantly thou
    hast stuck to the bare fortune of that beggar Posthumus, thou
    canst not, in the course of gratitude, but be a diligent follower
    of mine. Wilt thou serve me?
  CLOTEN. Give me thy hand; here's my purse. Hast any of thy late
    master's garments in thy possession?
  CLOTEN. The first service thou dost me, fetch that suit hither. Let
    it be thy first service; go.
  CLOTEN. Meet thee at Milford Haven! I forgot to ask him one thing;
    I'll remember't anon. Even there, thou villain Posthumus, will I
    kill thee. I would these garments were come. She said upon a
    time- the bitterness of it I now belch from my heart- that she
    held the very garment of Posthumus in more respect than my noble
    and natural person, together with the adornment of my qualities.
    With that suit upon my back will I ravish her; first kill him,
    and in her eyes. There shall she see my valour, which will then
    be a torment to her contempt. He on the ground, my speech of
    insultment ended on his dead body, and when my lust hath dined-
    which, as I say, to vex her I will execute in the clothes that
    she so prais'd- to the court I'll knock her back, foot her home
    again. She hath despis'd me rejoicingly, and I'll be merry in my
    revenge.
                Re-enter PISANIO, with the clothes  
    Be those the garments?
  CLOTEN. How long is't since she went to Milford Haven?
  CLOTEN. Bring this apparel to my chamber; that is the second thing
    that I have commanded thee. The third is that thou wilt be a
    voluntary mute to my design. Be but duteous and true, preferment
    shall tender itself to thee. My revenge is now at Milford, would
    I had wings to follow it! Come, and be true.            Exit
  CLOTEN. I am near to th' place where they should meet, if Pisanio
    have mapp'd it truly. How fit his garments serve me! Why should
    his mistress, who was made by him that made the tailor, not be
    fit too? The rather- saving reverence of the word- for 'tis said
    a woman's fitness comes by fits. Therein I must play the workman.
    I dare speak it to myself, for it is not vain-glory for a man and
    his glass to confer in his own chamber- I mean, the lines of my
    body are as well drawn as his; no less young, more strong, not
    beneath him in fortunes, beyond him in the advantage of the time,
    above him in birth, alike conversant in general services, and
    more remarkable in single oppositions. Yet this imperceiverant
    thing loves him in my despite. What mortality is! Posthumus, thy
    head, which now is growing upon thy shoulders, shall within this
    hour be off; thy mistress enforced; thy garments cut to pieces
    before her face; and all this done, spurn her home to her father,
    who may, haply, be a little angry for my so rough usage; but my
    mother, having power of his testiness, shall turn all into my  
    commendations. My horse is tied up safe. Out, sword, and to a
    sore purpose! Fortune, put them into my hand. This is the very
    description of their meeting-place; and the fellow dares not
    deceive me.                                             Exit
SCENE II.
Wales. Before the cave of BELARIUS
Enter, from the cave, BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, ARVIRAGUS, and IMOGEN
  CLOTEN. I cannot find those runagates; that villain
    Hath mock'd me. I am faint.
  CLOTEN. Soft! What are you
    That fly me thus? Some villain mountaineers?
    I have heard of such. What slave art thou?
  CLOTEN. Thou art a robber,
    A law-breaker, a villain. Yield thee, thief.
  CLOTEN. Thou villain base,
    Know'st me not by my clothes?
  CLOTEN. Thou precious varlet,
    My tailor made them not.
  CLOTEN. Thou injurious thief,
    Hear but my name, and tremble.  
  CLOTEN. Cloten, thou villain.
  CLOTEN. To thy further fear,
    Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt know
    I am son to th' Queen.
  CLOTEN. Art not afeard?
  CLOTEN. Die the death.
    When I have slain thee with my proper hand,
    I'll follow those that even now fled hence,
    And on the gates of Lud's Town set your heads.
    Yield, rustic mountaineer.                  Exeunt, fighting
                Re-enter BELARIUS and ARVIRAGUS  
