  Hor. Friends to this ground.
  Hor. A piece of him.
  Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
  Hor. Well, sit we down,
    And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.
  Hor. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
  Hor. What art thou that usurp'st this time of night
    Together with that fair and warlike form
    In which the majesty of buried Denmark
    Did sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak!
  Hor. Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee speak!
                                                     Exit Ghost.
  Hor. Before my God, I might not this believe
    Without the sensible and true avouch
    Of mine own eyes.  
  Hor. As thou art to thyself.
    Such was the very armour he had on
    When he th' ambitious Norway combated.
    So frown'd he once when, in an angry parle,
    He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
    'Tis strange.
  Hor. In what particular thought to work I know not;
    But, in the gross and scope of my opinion,
    This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
  Hor. That can I.
    At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
    Whose image even but now appear'd to us,
    Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
    Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,
    Dar'd to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
    (For so this side of our known world esteem'd him)
    Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal'd compact,
    Well ratified by law and heraldry,
    Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
    Which he stood seiz'd of, to the conqueror;
    Against the which a moiety competent
    Was gaged by our king; which had return'd
    To the inheritance of Fortinbras,
    Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
    And carriage of the article design'd,
    His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
    Of unimproved mettle hot and full,  
    Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,
    Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,
    For food and diet, to some enterprise
    That hath a stomach in't; which is no other,
    As it doth well appear unto our state,
    But to recover of us, by strong hand
    And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
    So by his father lost; and this, I take it,
    Is the main motive of our preparations,
    The source of this our watch, and the chief head
    Of this post-haste and romage in the land.
  Hor. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
    In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
    A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
    The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
    Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;  
    As stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,
    Disasters in the sun; and the moist star
    Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands
    Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
    And even the like precurse of fierce events,
    As harbingers preceding still the fates
    And prologue to the omen coming on,
    Have heaven and earth together demonstrated
    Unto our climature and countrymen.
                      Enter Ghost again.
    But soft! behold! Lo, where it comes again!
    I'll cross it, though it blast me.- Stay illusion!
                                               Spreads his arms.
    If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
    Speak to me.
    If there be any good thing to be done,
    That may to thee do ease, and, race to me,
    Speak to me.  
    If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
    Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
    O, speak!
    Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
    Extorted treasure in the womb of earth
    (For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death),
                                                 The cock crows.
    Speak of it! Stay, and speak!- Stop it, Marcellus!
  Hor. Do, if it will not stand.
  Hor. 'Tis here!
  Hor. And then it started, like a guilty thing  
    Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
    The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
    Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
    Awake the god of day; and at his warning,
    Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
    Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
    To his confine; and of the truth herein
    This present object made probation.
  Hor. So have I heard and do in part believe it.
    But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
    Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
    Break we our watch up; and by my advice  
    Let us impart what we have seen to-night
    Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
    This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
    Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
    As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
    Let's do't, I pray; and I this morning know
    Where we shall find him most conveniently.           Exeunt.
Scene II.
Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle.
Flourish. [Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the Queen, Hamlet,
Polonius, Laertes and his sister Ophelia, [Voltemand, Cornelius,]
Lords Attendant.
  Hor. Hail to your lordship!
  Hor. The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
  Hor. A truant disposition, good my lord.
  Hor. My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
  Hor. Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
  Hor. O, where, my lord?
  Hor. I saw him once. He was a goodly king.  
  Hor. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
  Hor. My lord, the King your father.
  Hor. Season your admiration for a while
    With an attent ear, till I may deliver
    Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
    This marvel to you.
  Hor. Two nights together had these gentlemen
    (Marcellus and Bernardo) on their watch
    In the dead vast and middle of the night
    Been thus encount'red. A figure like your father,
    Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
    Appears before them and with solemn march
    Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walk'd
    By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
    Within his truncheon's length; whilst they distill'd  
    Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
    Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
    In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
    And I with them the third night kept the watch;
    Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
    Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
    The apparition comes. I knew your father.
    These hands are not more like.
  Hor. My lord, I did;
    But answer made it none. Yet once methought
    It lifted up it head and did address
    Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
    But even then the morning cock crew loud,
    And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
    And vanish'd from our sight.
  Hor. As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;  
    And we did think it writ down in our duty
    To let you know of it.
  Hor. O, yes, my lord! He wore his beaver up.
  Hor. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
  Hor. Nay, very pale.
  Hor. Most constantly.
  Hor. It would have much amaz'd you.
  Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
  Hor. Not when I saw't.
  Hor. It was, as I have seen it in his life,
    A sable silver'd.
  Hor. I warr'nt it will.
  Hor. It is a nipping and an eager air.
  Hor. I think it lacks of twelve.
  Hor. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season
    Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
                   A flourish of trumpets, and two pieces go off.
    What does this mean, my lord?
  Hor. Is it a custom?
  Hor. Look, my lord, it comes!
  Hor. It beckons you to go away with it,
    As if it some impartment did desire
    To you alone.
  Hor. No, by no means!
  Hor. Do not, my lord!
  Hor. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
    Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
    That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
    And there assume some other, horrible form
    Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
    And draw you into madness? Think of it.
    The very place puts toys of desperation,
    Without more motive, into every brain
    That looks so many fadoms to the sea
    And hears it roar beneath.
  Hor. Be rul'd. You shall not go.
  Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination.
  Hor. Have after. To what issue wail this come?
  Hor. Heaven will direct it.
  Hor. (within) My lord, my lord!
                   Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
  Hor. Heaven secure him!
  Hor. What news, my lord?
  Hor. Good my lord, tell it.
  Hor. Not I, my lord, by heaven!
  Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
    To tell us this.
  Hor. These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
  Hor. There's no offence, my lord.
  Hor. What is't, my lord? We will.
  Hor. In faith,
    My lord, not I.
  Hor. Propose the oath, my lord.  
  Hor. O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
  Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service.
  Hor. O, my dear lord!
  Hor. Well, my lord.
    If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
    And scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
    Sound a flourish. [Enter Trumpets and Kettledrums. Danish
    march. [Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
      Guildenstern, and other Lords attendant, with the Guard
                       carrying torches.
  Hor. Half a share.
  Hor. You might have rhym'd.
  Hor. Very well, my lord.
  Hor. I did very well note him.
  Hor. 'Twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew
    Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
  Hor. What are they that would speak with me?
  Hor. Let them come in.
                                               [Exit Attendant.]
    I do not know from what part of the world
    I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
                          Enter Sailors.
  Hor. Let him bless thee too.
  Hor. (reads the letter) 'Horatio, when thou shalt have overlook'd
    this, give these fellows some means to the King. They have
    letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of  
    very warlike appointment gave us chase. Finding ourselves too
    slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple I
    boarded them. On the instant they got clear of our ship; so I
    alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like thieves
    of mercy; but they knew what they did: I am to do a good turn for
    them. Let the King have the letters I have sent, and repair thou
    to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I have words
    to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
    light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring
    thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course
    for England. Of them I have much to tell thee. Farewell.
                            'He that thou knowest thine, HAMLET.'
    Come, I will give you way for these your letters,
    And do't the speedier that you may direct me
    To him from whom you brought them.                   Exeunt.
Scene VII.
Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.
Enter King and Laertes.
  Hor. Custom hath made it in him a Property of easiness.
  Hor. It might, my lord.
  Hor. Ay, my lord.
  Hor. Not a jot more, my lord.
  Hor. Ay, my lord, And of calveskins too.
  Hor. What's that, my lord?
  Hor. E'en so.
  Hor. E'en so, my lord.
  Hor. 'Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.  
  Hor. Good my lord, be quiet.
             [The Attendants part them, and they come out of the
                                                         grave.]
  Hor. Remember it, my lord!
  Hor. That is most certain.
  Hor. Is't possible?
  Hor. I beseech you.
  Hor. Ay, good my lord.
  Hor. How was this seal'd?
  Hor. So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to't.
  Hor. Why, what a king is this!
  Hor. It must be shortly known to him from England
    What is the issue of the business there.  
  Hor. Peace! Who comes here?
                 Enter young Osric, a courtier.
  Hor. [aside to Hamlet] No, my good lord.
  Hor. [aside] His purse is empty already. All's golden words are
    spent.
  Hor. [aside to Hamlet] I knew you must be edified by the margent
    ere you had done.
  Hor. This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.  
  Hor. You will lose this wager, my lord.
  Hor. Nay, good my lord -
  Hor. If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their
    repair hither and say you are not fit.
  Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?
  Hor. Never believe it.
    I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
    Here's yet some liquor left.
  Hor. Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
    And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
                                                 [March within.]
    Why does the drum come hither?
    Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassadors, with Drum,
                  Colours, and Attendants.
  Hor. What is it you will see?
    If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
  Hor. Not from his mouth,
    Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
    He never gave commandment for their death.
    But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
    You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
    Are here arriv'd, give order that these bodies
    High on a stage be placed to the view;
    And let me speak to the yet unknowing world
    How these things came about. So shall You hear
    Of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts;
    Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters;
    Of deaths put on by cunning and forc'd cause;
    And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
    Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
    Truly deliver.
  Hor. Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
    And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more.
    But let this same be presently perform'd,
    Even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance
    On plots and errors happen.
