  Queen. Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,
    And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
    Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
    Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
    Thou know'st 'tis common. All that lives must die,
    Passing through nature to eternity.  
  Queen. If it be,
    Why seems it so particular with thee?
  Queen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
    I pray thee stay with us, go not to Wittenberg.
  Queen. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
    And sure I am two men there are not living
    To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
    To show us so much gentry and good will
    As to expend your time with us awhile
    For the supply and profit of our hope,
    Your visitation shall receive such thanks
    As fits a king's remembrance.
  Queen. Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.  
    And I beseech you instantly to visit
    My too much changed son.- Go, some of you,
    And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
  Queen. Ay, amen!
                 Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, [with some
                                                    Attendants].
                         Enter Polonius.
  Queen. I doubt it is no other but the main,
    His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
  Queen. More matter, with less art.
  Queen. Came this from Hamlet to her?
  Queen. it may be, very like.
  Queen. So he does indeed.
  Queen. But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
  Queen. Did he receive you well?
  Queen. Did you assay him  
    To any pastime?
  Queen. I shall obey you;
    And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
    That your good beauties be the happy cause
    Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
    Will bring him to his wonted way again,
    To both your honours.
  Queen. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
  Queen. The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
  Queen. How fares my lord?
  Queen. I'll warrant you; fear me not. Withdraw; I hear him coming.
                              [Polonius hides behind the arras.]
                          Enter Hamlet.
  Queen. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
  Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
  Queen. Why, how now, Hamlet?  
  Queen. Have you forgot me?
  Queen. Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.
  Queen. What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murther me?
    Help, help, ho!
  Queen. O me, what hast thou done?
  Queen. O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
  Queen. As kill a king?
  Queen. What have I done that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
    In noise so rude against me?
  Queen. Ay me, what act,
    That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
  Queen. O Hamlet, speak no more!
    Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,
    And there I see such black and grained spots
    As will not leave their tinct.
  Queen. O, speak to me no more!
    These words like daggers enter in mine ears.
    No more, sweet Hamlet!
  Queen. No more!
                Enter the Ghost in his nightgown.
  Queen. Alas, he's mad!
  Queen. Alas, how is't with you,  
    That you do bend your eye on vacancy,
    And with th' encorporal air do hold discourse?
    Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;
    And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
    Your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
    Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
    Upon the beat and flame of thy distemper
    Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
  Queen. To whom do you speak this?
  Queen. Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
  Queen. No, nothing but ourselves.
  Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain.
    This bodiless creation ecstasy
    Is very cunning in.
  Queen. O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
  Queen. What shall I do?
  Queen. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,
    And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
    What thou hast said to me.
  Queen. Alack,
    I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.
  Queen. Bestow this place on us a little while.
                          [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]
    Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen to-night!
  Queen. Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
    Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit
    Behind the arras hearing something stir,
    Whips out his rapier, cries 'A rat, a rat!'
    And in this brainish apprehension kills
    The unseen good old man.
  Queen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd;
    O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
    Among a mineral of metals base,
    Shows itself pure. He weeps for what is done.
  Queen. I will not speak with her.
  Queen. What would she have?
  Queen. Let her come in.  
                                               [Exit Gentleman.]
    [Aside] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is)
    Each toy seems Prologue to some great amiss.
    So full of artless jealousy is guilt
    It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
                 Enter Ophelia distracted.
  Queen. How now, Ophelia?
  Queen. Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
  Queen. Nay, but Ophelia-
  Queen. Alas, look here, my lord!
  Queen. Alack, what noise is this?
  Queen. How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!  
    O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
  Queen. Calmly, good Laertes.
  Queen. But not by him!
  Queen. One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
    So fast they follow. Your sister's drown'd, Laertes.
  Queen. There is a willow grows aslant a brook,
    That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
    There with fantastic garlands did she come
    Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
    That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
    But our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them.
    There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
    Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,  
    When down her weedy trophies and herself
    Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide
    And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up;
    Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
    As one incapable of her own distress,
    Or like a creature native and indued
    Unto that element; but long it could not be
    Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
    Pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay
    To muddy death.
  Queen. Drown'd, drown'd.
  Queen. Sweets to the sweet! Farewell.
                                             [Scatters flowers.]
    I hop'd thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
    I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
    And not have strew'd thy grave.
  Queen. Hamlet, Hamlet!
  Queen. O my son, what theme?  
  Queen. For love of God, forbear him!
  Queen. This is mere madness;
    And thus a while the fit will work on him.
    Anon, as patient as the female dove
    When that her golden couplets are disclos'd,  
    His silence will sit drooping.
  Queen. He's fat, and scant of breath.
    Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.  
    The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
  Queen. I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.          Drinks.
  Queen. Come, let me wipe thy face.
  Queen. No, no! the drink, the drink! O my dear Hamlet!
    The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.                 [Dies.]
