  Doug. Thou art the king of honour.
    No man so potent breathes upon the ground
    But I will beard him.
                     Enter one with letters.
  Doug. Faith, and so we should;  
    Where now remains a sweet reversion.
    We may boldly spend upon the hope of what
    Is to come in.
    A comfort of retirement lives in this.
  Doug. As heart can think. There is not such a word
    Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.
                 Enter Sir Richard Vernon.
  Doug. That's the worst tidings that I hear of yet.
  Doug. Talk not of dying. I am out of fear
    Of death or death's hand for this one half-year.
                                                         Exeunt.
Scene II.
A public road near Coventry.
Enter Falstaff and Bardolph.
  Doug. You give him then advantage.
  Doug. You do not counsel well.
    You speak it out of fear and cold heart.
  Doug. Yea, or to-night.
  Doug. Defy him by the Lord Of Westmoreland.
  Doug. Marry, and shall, and very willingly.
Exit.
  Doug. Arm, gentlemen! to arms! for I have thrown
    A brave defiance in King Henry's teeth,
    And Westmoreland, that was engag'd, did bear it;
    Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
  Doug. Know then my name is Douglas,
    And I do haunt thee in the battle thus
    Because some tell me that thou art a king.
  Doug. The Lord of Stafford dear to-day hath bought
    Thy likeness; for instead of thee, King Harry,
    This sword hath ended him. So shall it thee,
    Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.
  Doug. All's done, all's won. Here breathless lies the King.
  Doug. Here.
  Doug. A fool go with thy soul, whither it goes!
    A borrowed title hast thou bought too dear:
    Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?
  Doug. Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats;
    I'll murder all his wardrop, piece by piece,
    Until I meet the King.
  Doug. Another king? They grow like Hydra's heads.
    I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
    That wear those colours on them. What art thou
    That counterfeit'st the person of a king?
  Doug. I fear thou art another counterfeit;
    And yet, in faith, thou bearest thee like a king.
    But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be,
    And thus I win thee.
   They fight. The King being in danger, enter Prince of Wales.
