  Alb., Corn. Dear sir, forbear!
  Alb. Pray, sir, be patient.
  Alb. My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
     Of what hath mov'd you.
  Alb. Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
  Alb. What's the matter, sir?
  Alb. I cannot be so partial, Goneril,
     To the great love I bear you -
  Alb. Well, you may fear too far.
  Alb. How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell.
     Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.
  Alb. Well, well; th' event.                            Exeunt.
Scene V.
Court before the Duke of Albany's Palace.
Enter Lear, Kent, and Fool.
  Alb. O Goneril,
     You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
     Blows in your face! I fear your disposition.
     That nature which contemns it origin
     Cannot be bordered certain in itself.
     She that herself will sliver and disbranch
     From her material sap, perforce must wither
     And come to deadly use.
  Alb. Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile;
     Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?
     Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform'd?
     A father, and a gracious aged man,
     Whose reverence even the head-lugg'd bear would lick,
     Most barbarous, most degenerate, have you madded.
     Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
     A man, a prince, by him so benefited!  
     If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
     Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,
     It will come,
     Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
     Like monsters of the deep.
  Alb. See thyself, devil!
     Proper deformity seems not in the fiend
     So horrid as in woman.
  Alb. Thou changed and self-cover'd thing, for shame!  
     Bemonster not thy feature! Were't my fitness
     To let these hands obey my blood,
     They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
     Thy flesh and bones. Howe'er thou art a fiend,
     A woman's shape doth shield thee.
  Alb. What news?
  Alb. Gloucester's eyes?
  Alb. This shows you are above,
     You justicers, that these our nether crimes
     So speedily can venge! But O poor Gloucester!
     Lose he his other eye?
  Alb. Where was his son when they did take his eyes?
  Alb. He is not here.
  Alb. Knows he the wickedness?
  Alb. Gloucester, I live
     To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the King,
     And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend.
     Tell me what more thou know'st.
                                                         Exeunt.
Scene III.
The French camp near Dover.
Enter Kent and a Gentleman.
  Alb. Our very loving sister, well bemet.
     Sir, this I hear: the King is come to his daughter,
     With others whom the rigour of our state
     Forc'd to cry out. Where I could not be honest,
     I never yet was valiant. For this business,
     It toucheth us as France invades our land,
     Not bolds the King, with others whom, I fear,
     Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
  Alb. Let's then determine
     With th' ancient of war on our proceeding.
  Alb. I'll overtake you.- Speak.
                              Exeunt [all but Albany and Edgar].
  Alb. Stay till I have read the letter.
  Alb. Why, fare thee well. I will o'erlook thy paper.
                                                   Exit [Edgar].
                            Enter Edmund.
  Alb. We will greet the time.                             Exit.
  Alb. Sir, you have show'd to-day your valiant strain,
     And fortune led you well. You have the captives
     Who were the opposites of this day's strife.
     We do require them of you, so to use them
     As we shall find their merits and our safety
     May equally determine.
  Alb. Sir, by your patience,
     I hold you but a subject of this war,
     Not as a brother.
  Alb. The let-alone lies not in your good will.
  Alb. Half-blooded fellow, yes.
  Alb. Stay yet; hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee
     On capital treason; and, in thine attaint,
     This gilded serpent [points to Goneril]. For your claim, fair
        sister,
     I bar it in the interest of my wife.
     'Tis she is subcontracted to this lord,
     And I, her husband, contradict your banes.
     If you will marry, make your loves to me;
     My lady is bespoke.
  Alb. Thou art arm'd, Gloucester. Let the trumpet sound.
     If none appear to prove upon thy person
     Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
     There is my pledge [throws down a glove]! I'll prove it on thy
        heart,
     Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
     Than I have here proclaim'd thee.
  Alb. A herald, ho!
  Alb. Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,
     All levied in my name, have in my name
     Took their discharge.
  Alb. She is not well. Convey her to my tent.
                                              [Exit Regan, led.]
                           Enter a Herald.
     Come hither, herald. Let the trumpet sound,
     And read out this.
  Alb. Ask him his purposes, why he appears
     Upon this call o' th' trumpet.
  Alb. Which is that adversary?
  Alb. Save him, save him!
  Alb. Shut your mouth, dame,
     Or with this paper shall I stop it. [Shows her her letter to
     Edmund.]- [To Edmund]. Hold, sir.
     [To Goneril] Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.  
     No tearing, lady! I perceive you know it.
  Alb. Most monstrous!
     Know'st thou this paper?
  Alb. Go after her. She's desperate; govern her.
                                              [Exit an Officer.]
  Alb. Methought thy very gait did prophesy
     A royal nobleness. I must embrace thee.
     Let sorrow split my heart if ever I
     Did hate thee, or thy father!
  Alb. Where have you hid yourself?
     How have you known the miseries of your father?
  Alb. If there be more, more woful, hold it in;
     For I am almost ready to dissolve,
     Hearing of this.
  Alb. But who was this?
  Alb. Speak, man.  
  Alb. Who dead? Speak, man.
  Alb. Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead.
                                               [Exit Gentleman.]
     This judgement of the heavens, that makes us tremble
     Touches us not with pity. O, is this he?
     The time will not allow the compliment
     That very manners urges.
  Alb. Great thing of us forgot!
     Speak, Edmund, where's the King? and where's Cordelia?
                 The bodies of Goneril and Regan are brought in.
     Seest thou this object, Kent?
  Alb. Even so. Cover their faces.
  Alb. Run, run, O, run!
  Alb. Haste thee for thy life.                    [Exit Edgar.]
  Alb. The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.
                                          [Edmund is borne off.]
    Enter Lear, with Cordelia [dead] in his arms, [Edgar, Captain,
                        and others following].
  Alb. Fall and cease!
  Alb. He knows not what he says; and vain is it
     That we present us to him.
  Alb. That's but a trifle here.
     You lords and noble friends, know our intent.
     What comfort to this great decay may come
     Shall be applied. For us, we will resign,
     During the life of this old Majesty,
     To him our absolute power; [to Edgar and Kent] you to your
        rights;
     With boot, and Such addition as your honours
     Have more than merited.- All friends shall taste
     The wages of their virtue, and all foes
     The cup of their deservings.- O, see, see!
  Alb. Bear them from hence. Our present business
     Is general woe. [To Kent and Edgar] Friends of my soul, you
        twain
     Rule in this realm, and the gor'd state sustain.
  Alb. The weight of this sad time we must obey,
     Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
     The oldest have borne most; we that are young
     Shall never see so much, nor live so long.
                                       Exeunt with a dead march.
THE END
