  Glou. It did always seem so to us; but now, in the division of the
     kingdom, it appears not which of the Dukes he values most, for
     equalities are so weigh'd that curiosity in neither can make
     choice of either's moiety.
  Glou. His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. I have so often
     blush'd to acknowledge him that now I am braz'd to't.
  Glou. Sir, this young fellow's mother could; whereupon she grew
     round-womb'd, and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she
     had a husband for her bed. Do you smell a fault?
  Glou. But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year elder than
     this, who yet is no dearer in my account. Though this knave came
     something saucily into the world before he was sent for, yet was  
     his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the
     whoreson must be acknowledged.- Do you know this noble gentleman,
     Edmund?
  Glou. My Lord of Kent. Remember him hereafter as my honourable
     friend.
  Glou. He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.
                                                 Sound a sennet.
     The King is coming.
      Enter one bearing a coronet; then Lear; then the Dukes of
      Albany and Cornwall; next, Goneril, Regan, Cordelia, with
                              Followers.
  Glou. I shall, my liege.
                                 Exeunt [Gloucester and Edmund].
  Glou. Here's France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
  Glou. Kent banish'd thus? and France in choler parted?
     And the King gone to-night? subscrib'd his pow'r?
     Confin'd to exhibition? All this done
     Upon the gad? Edmund, how now? What news?
  Glou. Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?
  Glou. What paper were you reading?
  Glou. No? What needed then that terrible dispatch of it into your
     pocket? The quality of nothing hath not such need to hide
     itself. Let's see. Come, if it be nothing, I shall not need
     spectacles.
  Glou. Give me the letter, sir.
  Glou. Let's see, let's see!
  Glou. (reads) 'This policy and reverence of age makes the world
     bitter to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes from us
     till our oldness cannot relish them. I begin to find an idle
     and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways,
     not as it hath power, but as it is suffer'd. Come to me, that
     of this I may speak more. If our father would sleep till I
     wak'd him, you should enjoy half his revenue for ever, and live
     the beloved of your brother,
                                                        'EDGAR.'
     Hum! Conspiracy? 'Sleep till I wak'd him, you should enjoy half
     his revenue.' My son Edgar! Had he a hand to write this? a heart
     and brain to breed it in? When came this to you? Who brought it?
  Glou. You know the character to be your brother's?
  Glou. It is his.
  Glou. Hath he never before sounded you in this business?
  Glou. O villain, villain! His very opinion in the letter! Abhorred
     villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish villain! worse than
     brutish! Go, sirrah, seek him. I'll apprehend him. Abominable
     villain! Where is he?
  Glou. Think you so?
  Glou. He cannot be such a monster.
  Glou. To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him.
     Heaven and earth! Edmund, seek him out; wind me into him, I pray
     you; frame the business after your own wisdom. I would unstate
     myself to be in a due resolution.
  Glou. These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to
     us. Though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus, yet
     nature finds itself scourg'd by the sequent effects. Love cools,
     friendship falls off, brothers divide. In cities, mutinies; in  
     countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and the bond crack'd
     'twixt son and father. This villain of mine comes under the
     prediction; there's son against father: the King falls from bias
     of nature; there's father against child. We have seen the best
     of our time. Machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all
     ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves. Find out
     this villain, Edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it
     carefully. And the noble and true-hearted Kent banish'd! his
     offence, honesty! 'Tis strange.                       Exit.
  Glou. Now, Edmund, where's the villain?
  Glou. But where is he?
  Glou. Where is the villain, Edmund?
  Glou. Pursue him, ho! Go after.        [Exeunt some Servants].
     By no means what?
  Glou. Let him fly far.
     Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;
     And found- dispatch. The noble Duke my master,
     My worthy arch and patron, comes to-night.
     By his authority I will proclaim it
     That he which find, him shall deserve our thanks,
     Bringing the murderous caitiff to the stake;
     He that conceals him, death.
  Glou. Strong and fast'ned villain!
     Would he deny his letter? I never got him.
                                                  Tucket within.
     Hark, the Duke's trumpets! I know not why he comes.
     All ports I'll bar; the villain shall not scape;
     The Duke must grant me that. Besides, his picture
     I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
     May have due note of him, and of my land,  
     Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means
     To make thee capable.
                Enter Cornwall, Regan, and Attendants.
  Glou. O madam, my old heart is crack'd, it's crack'd!
  Glou. O lady, lady, shame would have it hid!
  Glou. I know not, madam. 'Tis too bad, too bad!
  Glou. He did bewray his practice, and receiv'd
     This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.
  Glou. Ay, my good lord.
  Glou. For him I thank your Grace.
  Glou. I serve you, madam.
     Your Graces are right welcome.
                                               Exeunt. Flourish.
Scene II.
Before Gloucester's Castle.
Enter Kent and [Oswald the] Steward, severally.
  Glou. Weapons? arms? What's the matter here?
  Glou. How fell you out? Say that.
  Glou. Let me beseech your Grace not to do so.
     His fault is much, and the good King his master
     Will check him for't. Your purpos'd low correction
     Is such as basest and contemn'dest wretches
     For pilf'rings and most common trespasses
     Are punish'd with. The King must take it ill
     That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,
     Should have him thus restrain'd.
  Glou. I am sorry for thee, friend. 'Tis the Duke's pleasure,  
     Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
     Will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd. I'll entreat for thee.
  Glou. The Duke 's to blame in this; 'twill be ill taken.
Exit.
  Glou. My dear lord,
     You know the fiery quality of the Duke,
     How unremovable and fix'd he is
     In his own course.
  Glou. Well, my good lord, I have inform'd them so.
  Glou. Ay, my good lord.
  Glou. I would have all well betwixt you.                 Exit.
  Glou. The King is in high rage.
  Glou. He calls to horse, but will I know not whither.
  Glou. Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds
     Do sorely ruffle. For many miles about
     There's scarce a bush.
  Glou. Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural dealing! When
     I desir'd their leave that I might pity him, they took from me
     the use of mine own house, charg'd me on pain of perpetual
     displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for him, nor any
     way sustain him.
  Glou. Go to; say you nothing. There is division betwixt the Dukes,
     and a worse matter than that. I have received a letter this
     night- 'tis dangerous to be spoken- I have lock'd the letter in
     my closet. These injuries the King now bears will be revenged
     home; there's part of a power already footed; we must incline to
     the King. I will seek him and privily relieve him. Go you and
     maintain talk with the Duke, that my charity be not of him
     perceived. If he ask for me, I am ill and gone to bed. Though I
     die for't, as no less is threat'ned me, the King my old master
     must be relieved. There is some strange thing toward, Edmund.
     Pray you be careful.                                  Exit.  
  Glou. What are you there? Your names?
  Glou. What, hath your Grace no better company?
  Glou. Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,
     That it doth hate what gets it.
  Glou. Go in with me. My duty cannot suffer
     T' obey in all your daughters' hard commands.
     Though their injunction be to bar my doors
     And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
     Yet have I ventur'd to come seek you out
     And bring you where both fire and food is ready.
  Glou. Canst thou blame him?
                                                    Storm still.
     His daughters seek his death. Ah, that good Kent!
     He said it would be thus- poor banish'd man!
     Thou say'st the King grows mad: I'll tell thee, friend,
     I am almost mad myself. I had a son,
     Now outlaw'd from my blood. He sought my life
     But lately, very late. I lov'd him, friend-
     No father his son dearer. True to tell thee,
     The grief hath craz'd my wits. What a night 's this!
     I do beseech your Grace-
  Glou. In, fellow, there, into th' hovel; keep thee warm.
  Glou. Take him you on.
  Glou. No words, no words! hush.
  Glou. Here is better than the open air; take it thankfully. I will
     piece out the comfort with what addition I can. I will not be
     long from you.
  Glou. Come hither, friend. Where is the King my master?
  Glou. Good friend, I prithee take him in thy arms.
     I have o'erheard a plot of death upon him.
     There is a litter ready; lay him in't
     And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet
     Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master.
     If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
     With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
     Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up!
     And follow me, that will to some provision  
     Give thee quick conduct.
  Glou. Come, come, away!
                                         Exeunt [all but Edgar].
  Glou. What mean, your Graces? Good my friends, consider
     You are my guests. Do me no foul play, friends.
  Glou. Unmerciful lady as you are, I am none.
  Glou. By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done
     To pluck me by the beard.
  Glou. Naughty lady,
     These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin
     Will quicken, and accuse thee. I am your host.
     With robber's hands my hospitable favours
     You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?
  Glou. I have a letter guessingly set down,
     Which came from one that's of a neutral heart,
     And not from one oppos'd.
  Glou. To Dover.
  Glou. I am tied to th' stake, and I must stand the course.
  Glou. Because I would not see thy cruel nails
     Pluck out his poor old eyes; nor thy fierce sister
     In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.
     The sea, with such a storm as his bare head  
     In hell-black night endur'd, would have buoy'd up
     And quench'd the steeled fires.
     Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.
     If wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time,
     Thou shouldst have said, 'Good porter, turn the key.'
     All cruels else subscrib'd. But I shall see
     The winged vengeance overtake such children.
  Glou. He that will think to live till he be old,
     Give me some help!- O cruel! O ye gods!
  Glou. All dark and comfortless! Where's my son Edmund?
     Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature
     To quit this horrid act.
  Glou. O my follies! Then Edgar was abus'd.
     Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
  Glou. Away, get thee away! Good friend, be gone.
     Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
     Thee they may hurt.
  Old Man. You cannot see your way.
  Glou. I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
     I stumbled when I saw. Full oft 'tis seen
     Our means secure us, and our mere defects
     Prove our commodities. Ah dear son Edgar,
     The food of thy abused father's wrath!
     Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
     I'ld say I had eyes again!
  Old Man. How now? Who's there?
  Glou. I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
     I stumbled when I saw. Full oft 'tis seen
     Our means secure us, and our mere defects
     Prove our commodities. Ah dear son Edgar,
     The food of thy abused father's wrath!
     Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
     I'ld say I had eyes again!
  Old Man. How now? Who's there?
  Glou. Is it a beggarman?
  Old Man. Madman and beggar too.
  Glou. He has some reason, else he could not beg.
     I' th' last night's storm I such a fellow saw,
     Which made me think a man a worm. My son
     Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
     Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard more since.
     As flies to wanton boys are we to th' gods.
     They kill us for their sport.
  Glou. He has some reason, else he could not beg.
     I' th' last night's storm I such a fellow saw,
     Which made me think a man a worm. My son
     Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
     Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard more since.
     As flies to wanton boys are we to th' gods.
     They kill us for their sport.
  Glou. Is that the naked fellow?
  Old Man. Ay, my lord.
  Glou. Then prithee get thee gone. If for my sake
     Thou wilt o'ertake us hence a mile or twain
     I' th' way toward Dover, do it for ancient love;
     And bring some covering for this naked soul,
     Who I'll entreat to lead me.
  Old Man. Alack, sir, he is mad!  
  Glou. 'Tis the time's plague when madmen lead the blind.
     Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure.
     Above the rest, be gone.
  Old Man. I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have,
     Come on't what will.                                  Exit.
  Glou. Sirrah naked fellow-
  Glou. Then prithee get thee gone. If for my sake
     Thou wilt o'ertake us hence a mile or twain
     I' th' way toward Dover, do it for ancient love;
     And bring some covering for this naked soul,
     Who I'll entreat to lead me.
  Old Man. Alack, sir, he is mad!  
  Glou. 'Tis the time's plague when madmen lead the blind.
     Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure.
     Above the rest, be gone.
  Old Man. I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have,
     Come on't what will.                                  Exit.
  Glou. Sirrah naked fellow-
  Glou. 'Tis the time's plague when madmen lead the blind.
     Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure.
     Above the rest, be gone.
  Old Man. I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have,
     Come on't what will.                                  Exit.
  Glou. Sirrah naked fellow-
  Glou. Sirrah naked fellow-
  Glou. Come hither, fellow.
  Glou. Know'st thou the way to Dover?
  Glou. Here, take this Purse, thou whom the heavens' plagues
     Have humbled to all strokes. That I am wretched
     Makes thee the happier. Heavens, deal so still!  
     Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,
     That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
     Because he does not feel, feel your pow'r quickly;
     So distribution should undo excess,
     And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?
  Glou. There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
     Looks fearfully in the confined deep.
     Bring me but to the very brim of it,
     And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear
     With something rich about me. From that place
     I shall no leading need.
  Glou. When shall I come to th' top of that same hill?
  Glou. Methinks the ground is even.
  Glou. No, truly.
  Glou. So may it be indeed.
     Methinks thy voice is alter'd, and thou speak'st
     In better phrase and matter than thou didst.
  Glou. Methinks y'are better spoken.
  Glou. Set me where you stand.
  Glou. Let go my hand.
     Here, friend, is another purse; in it a jewel
     Well worth a poor man's taking. Fairies and gods
     Prosper it with thee! Go thou further off;
     Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.  
  Glou. With all my heart.
  Glou. O you mighty gods!                            He kneels.
     This world I do renounce, and, in your sights,
     Shake patiently my great affliction off.
     If I could bear it longer and not fall
     To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
     My snuff and loathed part of nature should
     Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!
     Now, fellow, fare thee well.
                                  He falls [forward and swoons].
  Glou. Away, and let me die.
  Glou. But have I fall'n, or no?
  Glou. Alack, I have no eyes!
     Is wretchedness depriv'd that benefit
     To end itself by death? 'Twas yet some comfort
     When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage
     And frustrate his proud will.
  Glou. Too well, too well.
  Glou. A poor unfortunate beggar.
  Glou. I do remember now. Henceforth I'll bear
     Affliction till it do cry out itself
     'Enough, enough,' and die. That thing you speak of,
     I took it for a man. Often 'twould say
     'The fiend, the fiend'- he led me to that place.
  Glou. I know that voice.
  Glou. The trick of that voice I do well remember.
     Is't not the King?
  Glou. O, let me kiss that hand!
  Glou. O ruin'd piece of nature! This great world
     Shall so wear out to naught. Dost thou know me?
  Glou. Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.
  Glou. What, with the case of eyes?
  Glou. I see it feelingly.
  Glou. Ay, sir.
  Glou. Alack, alack the day!
  Glou. You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me;
     Let not my worser spirit tempt me again
     To die before you please!
  Glou. Now, good sir, what are you?
  Glou. Hearty thanks.
     The bounty and the benison of heaven
     To boot, and boot!
                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
  Glou. Now let thy friendly hand
     Put strength enough to't.
                                             [Edgar interposes.]
  Glou. What, is he dead?
  Glou. The King is mad. How stiff is my vile sense,
     That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
     Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract.
     So should my thoughts be sever'd from my griefs,
     And woes by wrong imaginations lose  
     The knowledge of themselves.
                                                A drum afar off.
  Glou. Grace go with you, sir!
                                                   Exit [Edgar].
               Alarum and retreat within. Enter Edgar,
  Glou. No further, sir. A man may rot even here.  
  Glou. And that's true too.                             Exeunt.
Scene III.
The British camp, near Dover.
Enter, in conquest, with Drum and Colours, Edmund; Lear and Cordelia
as prisoners; Soldiers, Captain.
