  ELINOR. A strange beginning- 'borrowed majesty'!
  ELINOR. What now, my son! Have I not ever said
    How that ambitious Constance would not cease
    Till she had kindled France and all the world
    Upon the right and party of her son?  
    This might have been prevented and made whole
    With very easy arguments of love,
    Which now the manage of two kingdoms must
    With fearful bloody issue arbitrate.
  ELINOR. Your strong possession much more than your right,
    Or else it must go wrong with you and me;
    So much my conscience whispers in your ear,
    Which none but heaven and you and I shall hear.
                  Enter a SHERIFF
  ELINOR. Out on thee, rude man! Thou dost shame thy mother,
    And wound her honour with this diffidence.
  ELINOR. He hath a trick of Coeur-de-lion's face;
    The accent of his tongue affecteth him.  
    Do you not read some tokens of my son
    In the large composition of this man?
  ELINOR. Whether hadst thou rather be a Faulconbridge,
    And like thy brother, to enjoy thy land,
    Or the reputed son of Coeur-de-lion,
    Lord of thy presence and no land beside?
  ELINOR. I like thee well. Wilt thou forsake thy fortune,
    Bequeath thy land to him and follow me?
    I am a soldier and now bound to France.
  ELINOR. Nay, I would have you go before me thither.
  ELINOR. The very spirit of Plantagenet!
    I am thy grandam, Richard: call me so.
  ELINOR. Who is it thou dost call usurper, France?
  ELINOR. Out, insolent! Thy bastard shall be king,
    That thou mayst be a queen and check the world!
  ELINOR. There's a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.
  ELINOR. Come to thy grandam, child.
  ELINOR. His mother shames him so, poor boy, he weeps.
  ELINOR. Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth!
  ELINOR. Thou unadvised scold, I can produce
    A will that bars the title of thy son.
  ELINOR. Son, list to this conjunction, make this match;
    Give with our niece a dowry large enough;
    For by this knot thou shalt so surely tie
    Thy now unsur'd assurance to the crown
    That yon green boy shall have no sun to ripe
    The bloom that promiseth a mighty fruit.
    I see a yielding in the looks of France;
    Mark how they whisper. Urge them while their souls
    Are capable of this ambition,
    Lest zeal, now melted by the windy breath
    Of soft petitions, pity, and remorse,
    Cool and congeal again to what it was.
  ELINOR. Look'st thou pale, France? Do not let go thy hand.
  ELINOR. O foul revolt of French inconstancy!
  ELINOR. Farewell, gentle cousin.
  ELINOR. Come hither, little kinsman; hark, a word.
  ELINOR. My blessing go with thee!
