  CLOWN. Let her hang me. He that is well hang'd in this world needs
    to fear no colours.
  CLOWN. He shall see none to fear.
  CLOWN. Where, good Mistress Mary?
  CLOWN. Well, God give them wisdom that have it; and those that are
    fools, let them use their talents.
  CLOWN. Many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage; and for turning  
    away, let summer bear it out.
  CLOWN. Not so, neither; but I am resolv'd on two points.
  CLOWN. Apt, in good faith, very apt! Well, go thy way; if Sir Toby
    would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a piece of Eve's flesh
    as any in Illyria.
  CLOWN. Wit, an't be thy will, put me into good fooling! Those wits
    that think they have thee do very oft prove fools; and I that am
    sure I lack thee may pass for a wise man. For what says
    Quinapalus? 'Better a witty fool than a foolish wit.' God bless
    thee, lady!
  CLOWN. Do you not hear, fellows? Take away the lady.  
  CLOWN. Two faults, madonna, that drink and good counsel will amend;
    for give the dry fool drink, then is the fool not dry. Bid the
    dishonest man mend himself: if he mend, he is no longer
    dishonest; if he cannot, let the botcher mend him. Anything
    that's mended is but patch'd; virtue that transgresses is but
    patch'd with sin, and sin that amends is but patch'd with virtue.
    If that this simple syllogism will serve, so; if it will not,
    what remedy? As there is no true cuckold but calamity, so
    beauty's a flower. The lady bade take away the fool; therefore, I
    say again, take her away.
  CLOWN. Misprision in the highest degree! Lady, 'Cucullus non facit
    monachum'; that's as much to say as I wear not motley in my
    brain. Good madonna, give me leave to prove you a fool.
  CLOWN. Dexteriously, good madonna.
  CLOWN. I must catechize you for it, madonna.  
    Good my mouse of virtue, answer me.
  CLOWN. Good madonna, why mourn'st thou?
  CLOWN. I think his soul is in hell, madonna.
  CLOWN. The more fool, madonna, to mourn for your brother's soul
    being in heaven. Take away the fool, gentlemen.
  CLOWN. God send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the better
    increasing your folly! Sir Toby will be sworn that I am no fox;
    but he will not pass his word for twopence that you are no fool.
  CLOWN. Now Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou speak'st well
    of fools!
                             Re-enter MARIA
  CLOWN. Thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy eldest son should
    be a fool; whose skull Jove cram with brains! For- here he comes-
    one of thy kin has a most weak pia mater.
                         Enter SIR TOBY
  CLOWN. Good Sir Toby!
  CLOWN. Like a drown'd man, a fool, and a madman: one draught above
    heat makes him a fool; the second mads him; and a third drowns
    him.
  CLOWN. He is but mad yet, madonna, and the fool shall look to the
    madman.                                                 Exit
                           Re-enter MALVOLIO
  CLOWN. How now, my hearts! Did you never see the picture of 'we  
    three'?
  CLOWN. I did impeticos thy gratillity; for Malvolio's nose is no
    whipstock. My lady has a white hand, and the Myrmidons are no
    bottle-ale houses.
  CLOWN. By'r lady, sir, and some dogs will catch well.
  CLOWN. 'Hold thy peace, thou knave' knight? I shall be constrain'd
    in't to call thee knave, knight.
  CLOWN. I shall never begin if I hold my peace.
  CLOWN. Beshrew me, the knight's in admirable fooling.
  CLOWN. [Sings] His eyes do show his days are almost done.
  CLOWN. [Sings] Sir Toby, there you lie.
  CLOWN. [Sings] What an if you do?
  CLOWN. [Sings] O, no, no, no, no, you dare not.  
  CLOWN. Yes, by Saint Anne; and ginger shall be hot i' th' mouth
    too.
 SIR TOBY. Th' art i' th' right. Go, sir, rub your chain with crumbs.
    A stoup of wine, Maria!
  CLOWN. Are you ready, sir?
  CLOWN. No pains, sir; I take pleasure in singing, sir.
  CLOWN. Truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid one time or another.
  CLOWN. Now the melancholy god protect thee; and the tailor make thy
    doublet of changeable taffeta, for thy mind is a very opal. I
    would have men of such constancy put to sea, that their business
    might be everything, and their intent everywhere: for that's it
    that always makes a good voyage of nothing. Farewell.
                                                      Exit CLOWN
  CLOWN. No, sir, I live by the church.
  CLOWN. No such matter, sir: I do live by the church; for I do live
    at my house, and my house doth stand by the church.
  CLOWN. You have said, sir. To see this age! A sentence is but a
    chev'ril glove to a good wit. How quickly the wrong side may be
    turn'd outward!
  CLOWN. I would, therefore, my sister had had name, sir.
  CLOWN. Why, sir, her name's a word; and to dally with that word  
    might make my sister wanton. But indeed words are very rascals
    since bonds disgrac'd them.
  CLOWN. Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words, and words
    are grown so false I am loath to prove reason with them.
  CLOWN. Not so, sir; I do care for something; but in my conscience,
    sir, I do not care for you. If that be to care for nothing, sir,
    I would it would make you invisible.
  CLOWN. No, indeed, sir; the Lady Olivia has no folly; she will keep
    no fool, sir, till she be married; and fools are as like husbands
    as pilchers are to herrings- the husband's the bigger. I am
    indeed not her fool, but her corrupter of words.
  CLOWN. Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun- it
    shines everywhere. I would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be
    as oft with your master as with my mistress: think I saw your
    wisdom there.
  CLOWN. Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send the a beard!
  CLOWN. Would not a pair of these have bred, sir?
  CLOWN. I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to bring a
    Cressida to this Troilus.
  CLOWN. The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but a beggar:
    Cressida was a beggar. My lady is within, sir. I will construe to
    them whence you come; who you are and what you would are out of
    my welkin- I might say 'element' but the word is overworn.
                                                      Exit CLOWN
  CLOWN. Will you make me believe that I am not sent for you?
  CLOWN. Well held out, i' faith! No, I do not know you; nor I am not
    sent to you by my lady, to bid you come speak with her; nor your
    name is not Master Cesario; nor this is not my nose neither.
    Nothing that is so is so.
  CLOWN. Vent my folly! He has heard that word of some great man, and
    now applies it to a fool. Vent my folly! I am afraid this great
    lubber, the world, will prove a cockney. I prithee now, ungird
    thy strangeness, and tell me what I shall vent to my lady. Shall
    I vent to her that thou art coming?
  CLOWN. By my troth, thou hast an open hand. These wise men that
    give fools money get themselves a good report after fourteen
    years' purchase.
             Enter SIR ANDREW, SIR TOBY, and FABIAN
  CLOWN. This will I tell my lady straight. I would not be in some of
    your coats for two-pence.                               Exit
  CLOWN. Well, I'll put it on, and I will dissemble myself in't; and
    I would I were the first that ever dissembled in such a gown. I
    am not tall enough to become the function well nor lean enough to
    be thought a good student; but to be said an honest man and a
    good housekeeper goes as fairly as to say a careful man and a
    great scholar. The competitors enter.
                 Enter SIR TOBY and MARIA
  CLOWN. Bonos dies, Sir Toby; for as the old hermit of Prague, that
    never saw pen and ink, very wittily said to niece of King
    Gorboduc 'That that is is'; so I, being Master Parson, am Master
    Parson; for what is 'that' but that, and 'is' but is?  
  CLOWN. What ho, I say! Peace in this prison!
  CLOWN. Sir Topas the curate, who comes to visit Malvolio the
    lunatic.
  CLOWN. Out, hyperbolical fiend! How vexest thou this man!
    Talkest thou nothing but of ladies?
  CLOWN. Fie, thou dishonest Satan! I call thee by the most modest
    terms, for I am one of those gentle ones that will use the devil
    himself with courtesy. Say'st thou that house is dark?
  CLOWN. Why, it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes, and the
    clerestories toward the south north are as lustrous as ebony; and
    yet complainest thou of obstruction?
  CLOWN. Madman, thou errest. I say there is no darkness but
    ignorance; in which thou art more puzzled than the Egyptians in
    their fog.
  CLOWN. What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wild fowl?
  CLOWN. What think'st thou of his opinion?
  CLOWN. Fare thee well. Remain thou still in darkness: thou shalt
   hold th' opinion of Pythagoras ere I will allow of thy wits; and
    fear to kill a woodcock, lest thou dispossess the soul of thy
    grandam. Fare thee well.
  CLOWN. Nay, I am for all waters.
  CLOWN. [Sings] Hey, Robin, jolly Robin,
    Tell me how thy lady does.
  CLOWN. [Sings] My lady is unkind, perdy.
  CLOWN. [Sings] Alas, why is she so?
  CLOWN. [Sings] She loves another- Who calls, ha?
  CLOWN. Master Malvolio?
  CLOWN. Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits?
  CLOWN. But as well? Then you are mad indeed, if you be no better in
    your wits than a fool.
  CLOWN. Advise you what. you say: the minister is here.
    [Speaking as SIR TOPAS] Malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore!
    Endeavour thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain bibble-babble.
  CLOWN. Maintain no words with him, good fellow.- Who, I, sir? Not
    I, sir. God buy you, good Sir Topas.- Marry, amen.- I will sir, I
    will.
  CLOWN. Alas, sir, be patient. What say you, sir? I am shent for
    speaking to you.
  CLOWN. Well-a-day that you were, sir!
  CLOWN. I will help you to't. But tell me true, are you not mad
    indeed, or do you but counterfeit?
  CLOWN. Nay, I'll ne'er believe a madman till I see his brains.
    I will fetch you light and paper and ink.
  CLOWN. [Singing]
                   I am gone, sir,
                   And anon, sir,
                 I'll be with you again,
                   In a trice,
                   Like to the old Vice,
                 Your need to sustain;
                 Who with dagger of lath,  
                 In his rage and his wrath,
                   Cries, Ah, ha! to the devil,
                 Like a mad lad,
                 Pare thy nails, dad.
                   Adieu, goodman devil.                    Exit
SCENE III.
OLIVIA'S garden
Enter SEBASTIAN
  CLOWN. Good Master Fabian, grant me another request.
  CLOWN. Do not desire to see this letter.
  CLOWN. Ay, sir, we are some of her trappings.
  CLOWN. Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse for my
    friends.
  CLOWN. No, sir, the worse.
  CLOWN. Marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of me. Now my
    foes tell me plainly I am an ass; so that by my foes, sir, I
    profit in the knowledge of myself, and by my friends I am abused;
    so that, conclusions to be as kisses, if your four negatives make
    your two affirmatives, why then, the worse for my friends, and
    the better for my foes.
  CLOWN. By my troth, sir, no; though it please you to be one of my
    friends.
  CLOWN. But that it would be double-dealing, sir, I would you could
    make it another.
  CLOWN. Put your grace in your pocket, sir, for this once, and let
    your flesh and blood obey it.
  CLOWN. Primo, secundo, tertio, is a good play; and the old saying
    is 'The third pays for all.' The triplex, sir, is a good tripping
    measure; or the bells of Saint Bennet, sir, may put you in mind-  
    one, two, three.
  CLOWN. Marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come again. I go,
    sir; but I would not have you to think that my desire of having
    is the sin of covetousness. But, as you say, sir, let your bounty
    take a nap; I will awake it anon.                       Exit
                 Enter ANTONIO and OFFICERS
  CLOWN. O, he's drunk, Sir Toby, an hour agone; his eyes were set at
    eight i' th' morning.
  CLOWN. Truly, madam, he holds Belzebub at the stave's end as well
    as a man in his case may do. Has here writ a letter to you; I
    should have given 't you to-day morning, but as a madman's
    epistles are no gospels, so it skills not much when they are
    deliver'd.
  CLOWN. Look then to be well edified when the fool delivers the
    madman. [Reads madly ] 'By the Lord, madam-'
  CLOWN. No, madam, I do but read madness. An your ladyship will have
    it as it ought to be, you must allow vox.
  CLOWN. So I do, madonna; but to read his right wits is to read
    thus; therefore perpend, my Princess, and give ear.
  CLOWN. Ay, Madam.
  CLOWN. Why, 'Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some
    have greatness thrown upon them.' I was one, sir, in this
    interlude- one Sir Topas, sir; but that's all one. 'By the Lord,
    fool, I am not mad!' But do you remember- 'Madam, why laugh you
    at such a barren rascal? An you smile not, he's gagg'd'? And thus
    the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.
