  Osr. Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.
  Osr. Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart
    a thing to you from his Majesty.
  Osr. I thank your lordship, it is very hot.
  Osr. It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
  Osr. Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere- I cannot
    tell how. But, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to you that
    he has laid a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter-
  Osr. Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is
    newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman,
    full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and
    great showing. Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card
    or calendar of gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of
    what part a gentleman would see.
  Osr. Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
  Osr. Sir?
  Hor [aside to Hamlet] Is't not possible to understand in another
    tongue? You will do't, sir, really.
  Osr. Of Laertes?
  Osr. I know you are not ignorant-
  Osr. You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is-
  Osr. I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him
    by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
  Osr. Rapier and dagger.
  Osr. The King, sir, hath wager'd with him six Barbary horses;
    against the which he has impon'd, as I take it, six French
    rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and
    so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,
    very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of
    very liberal conceit.
  Osr. The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
  Osr. The King, sir, hath laid that, in a dozen passes between
    yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits; he hath
    laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate trial
    if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
  Osr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
  Osr. Shall I redeliver you e'en so?
  Osr. I commend my duty to your lordship.
  Osr. Ay, my good lord.
  Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit.
  Osr. Nothing neither way.
  Osr. Look to the Queen there, ho!
  Osr. How is't, Laertes?
  Osr. Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
    To the ambassadors of England gives
    This warlike volley.
