  Ros. Both your Majesties
    Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
    Put your dread pleasures more into command
    Than to entreaty.
  Ros. [to Polonius] God save you, sir!
                                                Exit [Polonius].  
  Ros. My most dear lord!
  Ros. As the indifferent children of the earth.
  Ros. Neither, my lord.
  Ros. None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.
  Ros. Then is the world one.
  Ros. We think not so, my lord.
  Ros. Why, then your ambition makes it one. 'Tis too narrow for your
    mind.
  Ros. Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that
    it is but a shadow's shadow.
  Ros. To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.
  Ros. To what end, my lord?
  Ros. [aside to Guildenstern] What say you?
  Ros. My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.  
  Ros. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten
    entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted them
    on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.
  Ros. Even those you were wont to take such delight in, the
    tragedians of the city.
  Ros. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
    innovation.
  Ros. No indeed are they not.  
  Ros. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is,
    sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top
    of question and are most tyrannically clapp'd fort. These are now
    the fashion, and so berattle the common stages (so they call
    them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills and
    dare scarce come thither.
  Ros. Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation
    holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was, for a
    while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player
    went to cuffs in the question.
  Ros. Ay, that they do, my lord- Hercules and his load too.
  Ros. Happily he's the second time come to them; for they say an old
    man is twice a child.
  Ros. Good my lord!
  Ros. He does confess he feels himself distracted,
    But from what cause he will by no means speak.
  Ros. Most like a gentleman.
  Ros. Niggard of question, but of our demands
    Most free in his reply.
  Ros. Madam, it so fell out that certain players
    We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
    And there did seem in him a kind of joy
    To hear of it. They are here about the court,
    And, as I think, they have already order
    This night to play before him.
  Ros. We shall, my lord.
                            Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
  Ros. Ay, my lord. They stay upon your patience.
  Ros. Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into
    amazement and admiration.
  Ros. She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.
  Ros. My lord, you once did love me.
  Ros. Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely
    bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to
    your friend.
  Ros. How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself
    for your succession in Denmark?
  Ros. The single and peculiar life is bound
    With all the strength and armour of the mind
    To keep itself from noyance; but much more
    That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
    The lives of many. The cesse of majesty
    Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw  
    What's near it with it. It is a massy wheel,
    Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
    To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
    Are mortis'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls,
    Each small annexment, petty consequence,
    Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
    Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
  Ros. What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
  Ros. Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
    And bear it to the chapel.
  Ros. Believe what?
  Ros. Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
  Ros. I understand you not, my lord.
  Ros. My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to
    the King.
  Ros. Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
    We cannot get from him.  
  Ros. Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
  Ros. Ho, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.
        Enter Hamlet and Guildenstern [with Attendants].
  Ros. Will't please you go, my lord?
