  SANDYS. New customs,
    Though they be never so ridiculous,
    Nay, let 'em be unmanly, yet are follow'd.
  SANDYS. They have all new legs, and lame ones. One would take it,
    That never saw 'em pace before, the spavin
    Or springhalt reign'd among 'em.
  SANDYS. 'Tis time to give 'em physic, their diseases
    Are grown so catching.
  SANDYS. The devil fiddle 'em! I am glad they are going,
    For sure there's no converting 'em. Now
    An honest country lord, as I am, beaten
    A long time out of play, may bring his plainsong  
    And have an hour of hearing; and, by'r Lady,
    Held current music too.
  SANDYS. No, my lord,
    Nor shall not while I have a stamp.
  SANDYS. He may, my lord; has wherewithal. In him  
    Sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine:
    Men of his way should be most liberal,
    They are set here for examples.
  SANDYS. I am your lordship's.                                Exeunt
ACT I. SCENE 4.
London. The Presence Chamber in York Place
Hautboys. A small table under a state for the Cardinal,
a longer table for the guests. Then enter ANNE BULLEN,
and divers other LADIES and GENTLEMEN, as guests, at one door;
at another door enter SIR HENRY GUILDFORD
  SANDYS. Sir Thomas Lovell, had the Cardinal
    But half my lay thoughts in him, some of these
    Should find a running banquet ere they rested
    I think would better please 'em. By my life,
    They are a sweet society of fair ones.
  SANDYS. I would I were;
    They should find easy penance.
  SANDYS. As easy as a down bed would afford it.
  SANDYS. By my faith,
    And thank your lordship. By your leave, sweet ladies.
                 [Seats himself between ANNE BULLEN and another lady]
    If I chance to talk a little wild, forgive me;
    I had it from my father.
  SANDYS. O, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too.
    But he would bite none; just as I do now,
    He would kiss you twenty with a breath.              [Kisses her]
  SANDYS. For my little cure,
    Let me alone.
         Hautboys. Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, attended; and
                         takes his state
  SANDYS. Your Grace is noble.
    Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks
    And save me so much talking.
  SANDYS. The red wine first must rise
    In their fair cheeks, my lord; then we shall have 'em
    Talk us to silence.
  SANDYS. Yes, if I make my play.
    Here's to your ladyship; and pledge it, madam,
    For 'tis to such a thing-
  SANDYS. I told your Grace they would talk anon.  
                             [Drum and trumpet. Chambers discharg'd]
