  REIGNIER. Let's raise the siege. Why live we idly here?
    Talbot is taken, whom we wont to fear;  
    Remaineth none but mad-brain'd Salisbury,
    And he may well in fretting spend his gall
    Nor men nor money hath he to make war.
  REIGNIER. Salisbury is a desperate homicide;
    He fighteth as one weary of his life.
    The other lords, like lions wanting food,
    Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.
  REIGNIER. I think by some odd gimmers or device
    Their arms are set, like clocks, still to strike on;
    Else ne'er could they hold out so as they do.
    By my consent, we'll even let them alone.
  REIGNIER. Fair maid, is 't thou wilt do these wondrous feats?
  REIGNIER. She takes upon her bravely at first dash.
  REIGNIER. My lord, methinks, is very long in talk.
  REIGNIER. Shall we disturb him, since he keeps no mean?
  REIGNIER. My lord, where are you? What devise you on?
    Shall we give o'er Orleans, or no?
  REIGNIER. Woman, do what thou canst to save our honours;
    Drive them from Orleans, and be immortaliz'd.
  REIGNIER. Why ring not out the bells aloud throughout the
    town?
    Dauphin, command the citizens make bonfires
    And feast and banquet in the open streets
    To celebrate the joy that God hath given us.  
  REIGNIER. 'Twas time, I trow, to wake and leave our beds,  
    Hearing alarums at our chamber doors.
  REIGNIER. If not of hell, the heavens, sure, favour him
  REIGNIER. And so was mine, my lord.
  REIGNIER. To whom?
  REIGNIER. Suffolk, what remedy?
    I am a soldier and unapt to weep
    Or to exclaim on fortune's fickleness.
  REIGNIER. Speaks Suffolk as he thinks?
  REIGNIER. Upon thy princely warrant I descend
    To give thee answer of thy just demand.
                                    Exit REIGNIER from the walls  
  REIGNIER. Welcome, brave Earl, into our territories;
    Command in Anjou what your Honour pleases.
  REIGNIER. Since thou dost deign to woo her little worth
    To be the princely bride of such a lord,
    Upon condition I may quietly
    Enjoy mine own, the country Maine and Anjou,
    Free from oppression or the stroke of war,
    My daughter shall be Henry's, if he please.
  REIGNIER. And I again, in Henry's royal name,
    As deputy unto that gracious king,  
    Give thee her hand for sign of plighted faith.
  REIGNIER. I do embrace thee as I would embrace
    The Christian prince, King Henry, were he here.
  REIGNIER.  [To CHARLES]  My lord, you do not well in
    obstinacy
    To cavil in the course of this contract.
    If once it be neglected, ten to one
    We shall not find like opportunity.
