  Kent. I thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany than
     Cornwall.
  Kent. Is not this your son, my lord?
  Kent. I cannot conceive you.
  Kent. I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so
     proper.
  Kent. I must love you, and sue to know you better.
  Kent. Good my liege-
  Kent. Royal Lear,
     Whom I have ever honour'd as my king,
     Lov'd as my father, as my master follow'd,
     As my great patron thought on in my prayers-
  Kent. Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
     The region of my heart! Be Kent unmannerly
     When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man?
     Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak
     When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour's bound
     When majesty falls to folly. Reverse thy doom;
     And in thy best consideration check
     This hideous rashness. Answer my life my judgment,  
     Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
     Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound
     Reverbs no hollowness.
  Kent. My life I never held but as a pawn
     To wage against thine enemies; nor fear to lose it,
     Thy safety being the motive.
  Kent. See better, Lear, and let me still remain
     The true blank of thine eye.
  Kent. Now by Apollo, King,
     Thou swear'st thy gods in vain.
  Kent. Do!
     Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
     Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,
     Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,  
     I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
  Kent. Fare thee well, King. Since thus thou wilt appear,
     Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
     [To Cordelia] The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,
     That justly think'st and hast most rightly said!
     [To Regan and Goneril] And your large speeches may your deeds  
        approve,
     That good effects may spring from words of love.
     Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;
     He'll shape his old course in a country new.
Exit.
  Kent. If but as well I other accents borrow,
     That can my speech defuse, my good intent
     May carry through itself to that full issue
     For which I raz'd my likeness. Now, banish'd Kent,
     If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn'd,
     So may it come, thy master, whom thou lov'st,
     Shall find thee full of labours.
         Horns within. Enter Lear, [Knights,] and Attendants.
  Kent. A man, sir.
  Kent. I do profess to be no less than I seem, to serve him truly
     that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to
     converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear  
     judgment, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
  Kent. A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the King.
  Kent. Service.
  Kent. You.
  Kent. No, sir; but you have that in your countenance which I would
     fain call master.
  Kent. Authority.
  Kent. I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in
     telling it and deliver a plain message bluntly. That which
     ordinary men are fit for, I am qualified in, and the best of me
     is diligence.
  Kent. Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so old to  
     dote on her for anything. I have years on my back forty-eight.
  Kent. Nor tripp'd neither, you base football player?
                                            [Trips up his heels.
  Kent. Come, sir, arise, away! I'll teach you differences. Away,
     away! If you will measure your lubber's length again, tarry; but
     away! Go to! Have you wisdom? So.
                                               [Pushes him out.]
  Kent. Why, fool?
  Kent. This is nothing, fool.
  Kent. This is not altogether fool, my lord.
  Kent. I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter.
Exit.
  Kent. Ay.
  Kent. I' th' mire.
  Kent. I love thee not.
  Kent. If I had thee in Lipsbury Pinfold, I would make thee care for
     me.
  Kent. Fellow, I know thee.
  Kent. A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a base, proud,
     shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy,
     worsted-stocking knave; a lily-liver'd, action-taking, whoreson,
     glass-gazing, superserviceable, finical rogue;
     one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of
     good service, and art nothing but the composition of a knave,  
     beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch;
     one whom I will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deny the
     least syllable of thy addition.
  Kent. What a brazen-fac'd varlet art thou, to deny thou knowest me!
     Is it two days ago since I beat thee and tripp'd up thy heels
     before the King? [Draws his sword.] Draw, you rogue! for, though
     it be night, yet the moon shines. I'll make a sop o' th'
     moonshine o' you. Draw, you whoreson cullionly barbermonger!
     draw!
  Kent. Draw, you rascal! You come with letters against the King, and
     take Vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her father.
     Draw, you rogue, or I'll so carbonado your shanks! Draw, you
     rascal! Come your ways!
  Kent. Strike, you slave! Stand, rogue! Stand, you neat slave!
     Strike!                                        [Beats him.]  
  Kent. With you, goodman boy, an you please! Come, I'll flesh ye!
     Come on, young master!
  Kent. No marvel, you have so bestirr'd your valour. You cowardly
     rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a tailor made thee.
  Kent. Ay, a tailor, sir. A stonecutter or a painter could not have
     made him so ill, though he had been but two hours at the trade.
  Kent. Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My lord, if
     you'll give me leave, I will tread this unbolted villain into
     mortar and daub the walls of a jakes with him. 'Spare my grey
     beard,' you wagtail?
  Kent. Yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.
  Kent. That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
     Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
     Like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain
     Which are too intrinse t' unloose; smooth every passion
     That in the natures of their lords rebel,
     Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
     Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
     With every gale and vary of their masters,
     Knowing naught (like dogs) but following.
     A plague upon your epileptic visage!  
     Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?
     Goose, an I had you upon Sarum Plain,
     I'ld drive ye cackling home to Camelot.
  Kent. No contraries hold more antipathy
     Than I and such a knave.
  Kent. His countenance likes me not.
  Kent. Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain.
     I have seen better faces in my time
     Than stands on any shoulder that I see
     Before me at this instant.
  Kent. Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
     Under th' allowance of your great aspect,
     Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
     On flickering Phoebus' front-
  Kent. To go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. I
     know, sir, I am no flatterer. He that beguil'd you in a plain
     accent was a plain knave, which, for my part, I will not be,
     though I should win your displeasure to entreat me to't.
  Kent. None of these rogues and cowards
     But Ajax is their fool.
  Kent. Sir, I am too old to learn.
     Call not your stocks for me. I serve the King;
     On whose employment I was sent to you.
     You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
     Against the grace and person of my master,
     Stocking his messenger.
  Kent. Why, madam, if I were your father's dog,
     You should not use me so.  
  Kent. Pray do not, sir. I have watch'd and travell'd hard.
     Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.
     A good man's fortune may grow out at heels.
     Give you good morrow!
  Kent. Good King, that must approve the common saw,
     Thou out of heaven's benediction com'st
     To the warm sun!
     Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
     That by thy comfortable beams I may
     Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles
     But misery. I know 'tis from Cordelia,
     Who hath most fortunately been inform'd
     Of my obscured course- and [reads] 'shall find time
     From this enormous state, seeking to give
     Losses their remedies'- All weary and o'erwatch'd,
     Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold  
     This shameful lodging.
     Fortune, good night; smile once more, turn thy wheel.
                                                         Sleeps.
Scene III.
The open country.
Enter Edgar.
  Kent. Hail to thee, noble master!
  Kent. No, my lord.
  Kent. It is both he and she-
     Your son and daughter.  
  Kent. Yes.
  Kent. I say yea.
  Kent. Yes, they have.
  Kent. By Juno, I swear ay!
  Kent. My lord, when at their home
     I did commend your Highness' letters to them,
     Ere I was risen from the place that show'd
     My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
     Stew'd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
     From Goneril his mistress salutations;  
     Deliver'd letters, spite of intermission,
     Which presently they read; on whose contents,
     They summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse,
     Commanded me to follow and attend
     The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks,
     And meeting here the other messenger,
     Whose welcome I perceiv'd had poison'd mine-
     Being the very fellow which of late
     Display'd so saucily against your Highness-
     Having more man than wit about me, drew.
     He rais'd the house with loud and coward cries.
     Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
     The shame which here it suffers.
  Kent. With the Earl, sir, here within.
  Kent. None.
     How chance the King comes with so small a number?
  Kent. Why, fool?
  Kent. Where learn'd you this, fool?
  Kent. Who's there, besides foul weather?
  Kent. I know you. Where's the King?
  Kent. But who is with him?
  Kent. Sir, I do know you,
     And dare upon the warrant of my note
     Commend a dear thing to you. There is division
     (Although as yet the face of it be cover'd
     With mutual cunning) 'twixt Albany and Cornwall;
     Who have (as who have not, that their great stars
     Thron'd and set high?) servants, who seem no less,
     Which are to France the spies and speculations
     Intelligent of our state. What hath been seen,
     Either in snuffs and packings of the Dukes,
     Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
     Against the old kind King, or something deeper,
     Whereof, perchance, these are but furnishings-
     But, true it is, from France there comes a power
     Into this scattered kingdom, who already,
     Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
     In some of our best ports and are at point
     To show their open banner. Now to you:
     If on my credit you dare build so far  
     To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
     Some that will thank you, making just report
     Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
     The King hath cause to plain.
     I am a gentleman of blood and breeding,
     And from some knowledge and assurance offer
     This office to you.
  Kent. No, do not.
     For confirmation that I am much more
     Than my out-wall, open this purse and take
     What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia
     (As fear not but you shall), show her this ring,
     And she will tell you who your fellow is
     That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!
     I will go seek the King.
  Kent. Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet:
     That, when we have found the King (in which your pain
     That way, I'll this), he that first lights on him  
     Holla the other.
                                             Exeunt [severally].
Scene II.
Another part of the heath.
Storm still. Enter Lear and Fool.
  Kent. Who's there?
  Kent. Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night
     Love not such nights as these. The wrathful skies
     Gallow the very wanderers of the dark
     And make them keep their caves. Since I was man,
     Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
     Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
     Remember to have heard. Man's nature cannot carry
     Th' affliction nor the fear.
  Kent. Alack, bareheaded?
     Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;
     Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest.
     Repose you there, whilst I to this hard house
     (More harder than the stones whereof 'tis rais'd,
     Which even but now, demanding after you,
     Denied me to come in) return, and force
     Their scanted courtesy.
  Kent. Here is the place, my lord. Good my lord, enter.
     The tyranny of the open night 's too rough
     For nature to endure.
  Kent. Good my lord, enter here.
  Kent. I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
  Kent. Good my lord, enter here.
  Kent. Give me thy hand. Who's there?
  Kent. What art thou that dost grumble there i' th' straw?
     Come forth.
                 Enter Edgar [disguised as a madman].
  Kent. He hath no daughters, sir.
  Kent. How fares your Grace?
  Kent. Who's there? What is't you seek?
  Kent. Good my lord, take his offer; go into th' house.
  Kent. Importune him once more to go, my lord.
     His wits begin t' unsettle.
  Kent. This way, my lord.
  Kent. Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
  Kent. Sirrah, come on; go along with us.
  Kent. All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience.
     The gods reward your kindness!
                                              Exit [Gloucester].
  Kent. How do you, sir? Stand you not so amaz'd.
     Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
  Kent. O pity! Sir, where is the patience now
     That you so oft have boasted to retain?
  Kent. Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
  Kent. Here, sir; but trouble him not; his wits are gone.
  Kent. Oppressed nature sleeps.
     This rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses,
     Which, if convenience will not allow,
     Stand in hard cure. [To the Fool] Come, help to bear thy master.
     Thou must not stay behind.
  Kent. Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back know you the
     reason?
  Kent. Who hath he left behind him general?
  Kent. Did your letters pierce the Queen to any demonstration of
     grief?
  Kent. O, then it mov'd her?
  Kent. Made she no verbal question?
  Kent. It is the stars,
     The stars above us, govern our conditions;
     Else one self mate and mate could not beget  
     Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?
  Kent. Was this before the King return'd?
  Kent. Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' th' town;
     Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers
     What we are come about, and by no means
     Will yield to see his daughter.
  Kent. A sovereign shame so elbows him; his own unkindness,
     That stripp'd her from his benediction, turn'd her
     To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
     To his dog-hearted daughters- these things sting
     His mind so venomously that burning shame
     Detains him from Cordelia.
  Kent. Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not?
  Kent. Well, sir, I'll bring you to our master Lear
     And leave you to attend him. Some dear cause  
     Will in concealment wrap me up awhile.
     When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
     Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you go
     Along with me.                                      Exeunt.
Scene IV.
The French camp.
Enter, with Drum and Colours, Cordelia, Doctor, and Soldiers.
  Kent. To be acknowledg'd, madam, is o'erpaid.
     All my reports go with the modest truth;
     Nor more nor clipp'd, but so.
  Kent. Pardon, dear madam.
     Yet to be known shortens my made intent.
     My boon I make it that you know me not
     Till time and I think meet.
  Kent. Kind and dear princess!
  Kent. In your own kingdom, sir.
  Kent. Most certain, sir.
  Kent. As 'tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.
  Kent. Report is changeable. 'Tis time to look about; the powers of
     the kingdom approach apace.
  Kent. My point and period will be throughly wrought,
     Or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.        Exit.
ACT V. Scene I.
The British camp near Dover.
Enter, with Drum and Colours, Edmund, Regan, Gentleman, and Soldiers.
  Kent. I am come
     To bid my king and master aye good night.  
     Is he not here?
  Kent. Alack, why thus?
  Kent. Is this the promis'd end?
  Kent. O my good master!
  Kent. If fortune brag of two she lov'd and hated,  
     One of them we behold.
  Kent. The same-
     Your servant Kent. Where is your servant Caius?
  Kent. No, my good lord; I am the very man-
  Kent. That from your first of difference and decay
     Have followed your sad steps.
  Kent. Nor no man else! All's cheerless, dark, and deadly.
     Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,
     And desperately are dead.
  Kent. Break, heart; I prithee break!
  Kent. Vex not his ghost. O, let him pass! He hates him
     That would upon the rack of this tough world
     Stretch him out longer.
  Kent. The wonder is, he hath endur'd so long.
     He but usurp'd his life.
  Kent. I have a journey, sir, shortly to go.
     My master calls me; I must not say no.
