  ESCALUS. My lord.
  ESCALUS. If any in Vienna be of worth
    To undergo such ample grace and honour,
    It is Lord Angelo.
                          Enter ANGELO
  ESCALUS. Lead forth and bring you back in happiness!
  ESCALUS. I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
    To have free speech with you; and it concerns me
    To look into the bottom of my place:
    A pow'r I have, but of what strength and nature
    I am not yet instructed.
  ESCALUS. I'll wait upon your honour.                    Exeunt
SCENE II.
A street
Enter Lucio and two other GENTLEMEN
  ESCALUS. Ay, but yet
    Let us be keen, and rather cut a little
    Than fall and bruise to death. Alas! this gentleman,
    Whom I would save, had a most noble father.
    Let but your honour know,
    Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue,
    That, in the working of your own affections,
    Had time coher'd with place, or place with wishing,
    Or that the resolute acting of our blood
    Could have attain'd th' effect of your own purpose
    Whether you had not sometime in your life
    Err'd in this point which now you censure him,  
    And pull'd the law upon you.
  ESCALUS. Be it as your wisdom will.
  ESCALUS. [Aside] Well, heaven forgive him! and forgive us all!
    Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall;
    Some run from breaks of ice, and answer none,
    And some condemned for a fault alone.
         Enter ELBOW and OFFICERS with FROTH and POMPEY
  ESCALUS. This comes off well; here's a wise officer.
  ESCALUS. How know you that?
  ESCALUS. How! thy wife!
  ESCALUS. Dost thou detest her therefore?
  ESCALUS. How dost thou know that, constable?  
  ESCALUS. By the woman's means?
  ESCALUS. Do you hear how he misplaces?
  ESCALUS. Go to, go to; no matter for the dish, sir.
  ESCALUS. Come, you are a tedious fool. To the purpose: what was
    done to Elbow's wife that he hath cause to complain of? Come me
    to what was done to her.
  ESCALUS. No, sir, nor I mean it not.
  ESCALUS. I think no less. Good morrow to your lordship.
    [Exit ANGELO] Now, sir, come on; what was done to Elbow's wife,
    once more?
  ESCALUS. Well, sir, what did this gentleman to her?
  ESCALUS. Ay, sir, very well.
  ESCALUS. Well, I do so.
  ESCALUS. Why, no.
  ESCALUS. He's in the right, constable; what say you to it?
  ESCALUS. Which is the wiser here, Justice or Iniquity? Is this
    true?
  ESCALUS. If he took you a box o' th' ear, you might have your
    action of slander too.
  ESCALUS. Truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him that
    thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him continue in his
    courses till thou know'st what they are.
  ESCALUS. Where were you born, friend?
  ESCALUS. Are you of fourscore pounds a year?  
  ESCALUS. So. What trade are you of, sir?
  ESCALUS. Your mistress' name?
  ESCALUS. Hath she had any more than one husband?
  ESCALUS. Nine! Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master Froth, I
    would not have you acquainted with tapsters: they will draw you,
    Master Froth, and you will hang them. Get you gone, and let me
    hear no more of you.
  ESCALUS. Well, no more of it, Master Froth; farewell. [Exit FROTH]
    Come you hither to me, Master Tapster; what's your name, Master
    Tapster?
  ESCALUS. What else?
  ESCALUS. Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you; so  
    that, in the beastliest sense, you are Pompey the Great. Pompey,
    you are partly a bawd, Pompey, howsoever you colour it in being a
    tapster. Are you not? Come, tell me true; it shall be the better
    for you.
  ESCALUS. How would you live, Pompey- by being a bawd? What do you
    think of the trade, Pompey? Is it a lawful trade?
  ESCALUS. But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it shall not be
    allowed in Vienna.
  ESCALUS. No, Pompey.
  ESCALUS. There is pretty orders beginning, I can tell you: but it
    is but heading and hanging.
  ESCALUS. Thank you, good Pompey; and, in requital of your prophecy,
    hark you: I advise you, let me not find you before me again upon
    any complaint whatsoever- no, not for dwelling where you do; if I
    do, Pompey, I shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd
    Caesar to you; in plain dealing, Pompey, I shall have you whipt.
    So for this time, Pompey, fare you well.
  ESCALUS. Come hither to me, Master Elbow; come hither, Master
    Constable. How long have you been in this place of constable?
  ESCALUS. I thought, by the readiness in the office, you had
    continued in it some time. You say seven years together?
  ESCALUS. Alas, it hath been great pains to you! They do you wrong  
    to put you so oft upon't. Are there not men in your ward
    sufficient to serve it?
  ESCALUS. Look you, bring me in the names of some six or seven, the
    most sufficient of your parish.
  ESCALUS. To my house. Fare you well.              [Exit ELBOW]
    What's o'clock, think you?
  ESCALUS. I pray you home to dinner with me.
  ESCALUS. It grieves me for the death of Claudio;
    But there's no remedy.
  ESCALUS. It is but needful:
    Mercy is not itself that oft looks so;
    Pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
    But yet, poor Claudio! There is no remedy.  
    Come, sir.                                            Exeunt
SCENE II.
Another room in ANGELO'S house
Enter PROVOST and a SERVANT
  ESCALUS. Go, away with her to prison.
  ESCALUS. Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the
    same kind! This would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.  
  ESCALUS. That fellow is a fellow of much license. Let him be call'd
    before us. Away with her to prison. Go to; no more words. [Exeunt
    OFFICERS with MISTRESS OVERDONE]  Provost, my brother Angelo will
    not be alter'd: Claudio must die to-morrow. Let him be furnish'd
    with divines, and have all charitable preparation. If my brother
    wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
  ESCALUS. Good even, good father.
  ESCALUS. Of whence are you?
  ESCALUS. What news abroad i' th' world?
  ESCALUS. One that, above all other strifes, contended especially to
    know himself.
  ESCALUS. Rather rejoicing to see another merry than merry at
    anything which profess'd to make him rejoice; a gentleman of all
    temperance. But leave we him to his events, with a prayer they
    may prove prosperous; and let me desire to know how you find
    Claudio prepar'd. I am made to understand that you have lent him
    visitation.  
  ESCALUS. You have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner
    the very debt of your calling. I have labour'd for the poor
    gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty; but my brother
    justice have I found so severe that he hath forc'd me to tell him
    he is indeed Justice.
  ESCALUS. I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.
  ESCALUS. Every letter he hath writ hath disvouch'd other.
  ESCALUS. I guess not.
  ESCALUS. He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of
     complaints; and to deliver us from devices hereafter, which
    shall then have no power to stand against us.
  ESCALUS. I shall, sir; fare you well.
  ESCALUS. My lord, we'll do it throughly.             Exit DUKE
    Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that Friar Lodowick to be
    a dishonest person?
  ESCALUS. We shall entreat you to abide here till he come and
    enforce them against him. We shall find this friar a notable
    fellow.
  ESCALUS. Call that same Isabel here once again; I would speak with
    her. [Exit an ATTENDANT] Pray you, my lord, give me leave to
    question; you shall see how I'll handle her.
  ESCALUS. Say you?
  ESCALUS. I will go darkly to work with her.
  ESCALUS. Come on, mistress; here's a gentlewoman denies all that
    you have said.
  ESCALUS. In very good time. Speak not you to him till we call upon
    you.
  ESCALUS. Come, sir; did you set these women on to slander Lord
    Angelo? They have confess'd you did.
  ESCALUS. How! Know you where you are?
  ESCALUS. The Duke's in us; and we will hear you speak;
    Look you speak justly.
  ESCALUS. Why, thou unreverend and unhallowed friar,
    Is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women
    To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth,
    And in the witness of his proper ear,
    To call him villain; and then to glance from him
    To th' Duke himself, to tax him with injustice?
    Take him hence; to th' rack with him! We'll touze you
    Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
    What, 'unjust'!
  ESCALUS. Slander to th' state! Away with him to prison!
  ESCALUS. Such a fellow is not to be talk'd withal. Away with him to
    prison! Where is the Provost? Away with him to prison! Lay bolts  
    enough upon him; let him speak no more. Away with those giglets
    too, and with the other confederate companion!
                            [The PROVOST lays bands on the DUKE]
  ESCALUS. My lord, I am more amaz'd at his dishonour
    Than at the strangeness of it.
  ESCALUS. I am sorry one so learned and so wise
    As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear'd,
    Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
    And lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
