  LUCIO. If the Duke, with the other dukes, come not to composition
    with the King of Hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon the
    King.
  LUCIO. Thou conclud'st like the sanctimonious pirate that went to
    sea with the Ten Commandments, but scrap'd one out of the table.
  LUCIO. Ay, that he raz'd.
  LUCIO. I believe thee; for I think thou never wast where grace was
    said.  
  LUCIO. In any proportion or in any language.
  LUCIO. Ay, why not? Grace is grace, despite of all controversy; as,
    for example, thou thyself art a wicked villain, despite of all
    grace.
  LUCIO. I grant; as there may between the lists and the velvet.
    Thou art the list.
  LUCIO. I think thou dost; and, indeed, with most painful feeling of
    thy speech. I will, out of thine own confession, learn to begin
    thy health; but, whilst I live, forget to drink after thee.
  LUCIO. Behold, behold, where Madam Mitigation comes! I have
    purchas'd as many diseases under her roof as come to-
  LUCIO. A French crown more.
  LUCIO. Nay, not, as one would say, healthy; but so sound as things
    that are hollow: thy bones are hollow; impiety has made a feast
    of thee.
  LUCIO. But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so. Art
    thou sure of this?
  LUCIO. Believe me, this may be; he promis'd to meet me two hours
    since, and he was ever precise in promise-keeping.
  LUCIO. Away; let's go learn the truth of it.
                                      Exeunt Lucio and GENTLEMEN
  LUCIO. Why, how now, Claudio, whence comes this restraint?
  LUCIO. If I could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would send for
    certain of my creditors; and yet, to say the truth, I had as lief
    have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment.
    What's thy offence, Claudio?
  LUCIO. What, is't murder?
  LUCIO. Lechery?
  LUCIO. A hundred, if they'll do you any good. Is lechery so look'd
    after?  
  LUCIO. With child, perhaps?
  LUCIO. I warrant it is; and thy head stands so tickle on thy
    shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off.
    Send after the Duke, and appeal to him.
  LUCIO. I pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the like,
    which else would stand under grievous imposition, as for the
    enjoying of thy life, who I would be sorry should be thus
    foolishly lost at a game of tick-tack. I'll to her.
  LUCIO. Within two hours.
  LUCIO. [ Within] Ho! Peace be in this place!
  LUCIO. Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses
    Proclaim you are no less. Can you so stead me
    As bring me to the sight of Isabella,
    A novice of this place, and the fair sister
    To her unhappy brother Claudio?
  LUCIO. Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you.
    Not to be weary with you, he's in prison.
  LUCIO. For that which, if myself might be his judge,
    He should receive his punishment in thanks:
    He hath got his friend with child.
  LUCIO. It is true.
    I would not- though 'tis my familiar sin
    With maids to seem the lapwing, and to jest,  
    Tongue far from heart- play with all virgins so:
    I hold you as a thing enskied and sainted,
    By your renouncement an immortal spirit,
    And to be talk'd with in sincerity,
    As with a saint.
  LUCIO. Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, 'tis thus:
    Your brother and his lover have embrac'd.
    As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time
    That from the seedness the bare fallow brings
    To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
    Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.
  LUCIO. Is she your cousin?
  LUCIO. She it is.
  LUCIO. This is the point.
    The Duke is very strangely gone from hence;  
    Bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
    In hand, and hope of action; but we do learn,
    By those that know the very nerves of state,
    His givings-out were of an infinite distance
    From his true-meant design. Upon his place,
    And with full line of his authority,
    Governs Lord Angelo, a man whose blood
    Is very snow-broth, one who never feels
    The wanton stings and motions of the sense,
    But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge
    With profits of the mind, study and fast.
    He- to give fear to use and liberty,
    Which have for long run by the hideous law,
    As mice by lions- hath pick'd out an act
    Under whose heavy sense your brother's life
    Falls into forfeit; he arrests him on it,
    And follows close the rigour of the statute
    To make him an example. All hope is gone,
    Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
    To soften Angelo. And that's my pith of business  
    'Twixt you and your poor brother.
  LUCIO. Has censur'd him
    Already, and, as I hear, the Provost hath
    A warrant for his execution.
  LUCIO. Assay the pow'r you have.
  LUCIO. Our doubts are traitors,
    And make us lose the good we oft might win
    By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo,
    And let him learn to know, when maidens sue,
    Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
    All their petitions are as freely theirs
    As they themselves would owe them.
  LUCIO. But speedily.
  LUCIO. I take my leave of you.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Give't not o'er so; to him again, entreat him,
    Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown;
    You are too cold: if you should need a pin,
    You could not with more tame a tongue desire it.
    To him, I say.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] You are too cold.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Ay, touch him; there's the vein.
  LUCIO. [Aside] Ay, well said.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] That's well said.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] O, to him, to him, wench! He will relent;  
    He's coming; I perceive 't.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Thou'rt i' th' right, girl; more o' that.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Art avis'd o' that? More on't.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA) You had marr'd all else.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Go to; 'tis well; away.
  LUCIO. How now, noble Pompey! What, at the wheels of Caesar? Art
    thou led in triumph? What, is there none of Pygmalion's images,
    newly made woman, to be had now for putting the hand in the
    pocket and extracting it clutch'd? What reply, ha? What say'st
    thou to this tune, matter, and method? Is't not drown'd i' th'
    last rain, ha? What say'st thou, trot? Is the world as it was,
    man? Which is the way? Is it sad, and few words? or how? The
    trick of it?
  LUCIO. How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she still,
    ha?
  LUCIO. Why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be so; ever
    your fresh whore and your powder'd bawd- an unshunn'd  
    consequence; it must be so. Art going to prison, Pompey?
  LUCIO. Why, 'tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell; go, say I sent thee
    thither. For debt, Pompey- or how?
  LUCIO. Well, then, imprison him. If imprisonment be the due of a
    bawd, why, 'tis his right. Bawd is he doubtless, and of
    antiquity, too; bawd-born. Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to
    the prison, Pompey. You will turn good husband now, Pompey; you
    will keep the house.
  LUCIO. No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear. I will
    pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage. If you take it not
    patiently, why, your mettle is the more. Adieu trusty Pompey.
    Bless you, friar.
  LUCIO. Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?
  LUCIO. Then, Pompey, nor now. What news abroad, friar? what news?  
  LUCIO. Go to kennel, Pompey, go.
                               Exeunt ELBOW, POMPEY and OFFICERS
    What news, friar, of the Duke?
  LUCIO. Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other some, he is
    in Rome; but where is he, think you?
  LUCIO. It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the
    state and usurp the beggary he was never born to. Lord Angelo
    dukes it well in his absence; he puts transgression to't.
  LUCIO. A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him;
    something too crabbed that way, friar.
  LUCIO. Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it is
    well allied; but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till
    eating and drinking be put down. They say this Angelo was not  
    made by man and woman after this downright way of creation. Is it
    true, think you?
  LUCIO. Some report a sea-maid spawn'd him; some, that he was begot
    between two stock-fishes. But it is certain that when he makes
    water his urine is congeal'd ice; that I know to be true. And he
    is a motion generative; that's infallible.
  LUCIO. Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion
    of a codpiece to take away the life of a man! Would the Duke that
    is absent have done this? Ere he would have hang'd a man for the
    getting a hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing a
    thousand. He had some feeling of the sport; he knew the service,
    and that instructed him to mercy.
  LUCIO. O, sir, you are deceiv'd.
  LUCIO. Who- not the Duke? Yes, your beggar of fifty; and his use
    was to put a ducat in her clack-dish. The Duke had crotchets in  
    him. He would be drunk too; that let me inform you.
  LUCIO. Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the Duke; and
    I believe I know the cause of his withdrawing.
  LUCIO. No, pardon; 'tis a secret must be lock'd within the teeth
    and the lips; but this I can let you understand: the greater file
    of the subject held the Duke to be wise.
  LUCIO. A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.
  LUCIO. Sir, I know him, and I love him.
  LUCIO. Come, sir, I know what I know.
  LUCIO. Sir, my name is Lucio, well known to the Duke.
  LUCIO. I fear you not.
  LUCIO. I'll be hang'd first. Thou art deceiv'd in me, friar. But no
    more of this. Canst thou tell if Claudio die to-morrow or no?
  LUCIO. Why? For filling a bottle with a tun-dish. I would the Duke
    we talk of were return'd again. This ungenitur'd agent will
    unpeople the province with continency; sparrows must not build in
    his house-eaves because they are lecherous. The Duke yet would
    have dark deeds darkly answered; he would never bring them to  
    light. Would he were return'd! Marry, this Claudio is condemned
    for untrussing. Farewell, good friar; I prithee pray for me. The
    Duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on Fridays. He's not
    past it yet; and, I say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar
    though she smelt brown bread and garlic. Say that I said so.
    Farewell.                                               Exit
  LUCIO. Good even. Friar, where's the Provost?
  LUCIO. O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes
    so red. Thou must be patient. I am fain to dine and sup with
    water and bran; I dare not for my head fill my belly; one
    fruitful meal would set me to't. But they say the Duke will be
    here to-morrow. By my troth, Isabel, I lov'd thy brother. If the
    old fantastical Duke of dark corners had been at home, he had  
    lived.                                         Exit ISABELLA
  LUCIO. Friar, thou knowest not the Duke so well as I do; he's a
    better woodman than thou tak'st him for.
  LUCIO. Nay, tarry; I'll go along with thee; I can tell thee pretty
    tales of the Duke.
  LUCIO. I was once before him for getting a wench with child.
  LUCIO. Yes, marry, did I; but I was fain to forswear it: they would
    else have married me to the rotten medlar.
  LUCIO. By my troth, I'll go with thee to the lane's end. If bawdy
    talk offend you, we'll have very little of it. Nay, friar, I am a
    kind of burr; I shall stick.                          Exeunt
SCENE IV.
ANGELO'S house
Enter ANGELO and ESCALUS
  LUCIO. That's I, an't like your Grace.
    I came to her from Claudio, and desir'd her
    To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo
    For her poor brother's pardon.
  LUCIO. No, my good lord;
    Nor wish'd to hold my peace.
  LUCIO. I warrant your honour.
  LUCIO. Right.
  LUCIO. My lord, I know him; 'tis a meddling friar.
    I do not like the man; had he been lay, my lord,
    For certain words he spake against your Grace
    In your retirement, I had swing'd him soundly.
  LUCIO. But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,
    I saw them at the prison; a saucy friar,
    A very scurvy fellow.  
  LUCIO. My lord, most villainously; believe it.
  LUCIO. My lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are neither
    maid, widow, nor wife.
  LUCIO. Well, my lord.
  LUCIO. He was drunk, then, my lord; it can be no better.
  LUCIO. Well, my lord.
  LUCIO. Carnally, she says.
  LUCIO. Enough, my lord.
  LUCIO. 'Cucullus non facit monachum': honest in nothing but in his
    clothes; and one that hath spoke most villainous speeches of the
    Duke.  
  LUCIO. As any in Vienna, on my word.
  LUCIO. Not better than he, by her own report.
  LUCIO. Marry, sir, I think, if you handled her privately, she would
    sooner confess; perchance, publicly, she'll be asham'd.
       Re-enter OFFICERS with ISABELLA; and PROVOST with the
                    DUKE in his friar's habit
  LUCIO. That's the way; for women are light at midnight.
  LUCIO. My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of, here with the  
    Provost.
  LUCIO. Mum.
  LUCIO. This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.
  LUCIO. 'Tis he, my lord. Come hither, good-man bald-pate.
    Do you know me?
  LUCIO. O did you so? And do you remember what you said of the Duke?
  LUCIO. Do you so, sir? And was the Duke a fleshmonger, a fool, and
    a coward, as you then reported him to be?
  LUCIO. O thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by the nose for
    thy speeches?
  LUCIO. Come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! Why, you
    bald-pated lying rascal, you must be hooded, must you? Show your
    knave's visage, with a pox to you! Show your sheep-biting face,
    and be hang'd an hour! Will't not off?
             [Pulls off the FRIAR'S bood and discovers the DUKE]
  LUCIO. This may prove worse than hanging.
  LUCIO. Faith, my lord, I spoke it but according to the trick.
    If you will hang me for it, you may; but I had rather it would
    please you I might be whipt.
  LUCIO. I beseech your Highness, do not marry me to a whore. Your
    Highness said even now I made you a duke; good my lord, do not
    recompense me in making me a cuckold.
  LUCIO. Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death, whipping,
    and hanging.
