  POMPEY. Yonder man is carried to prison.
  POMPEY. A woman.
  POMPEY. Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.
  POMPEY. No; but there's a woman with maid by him. You have not
   heard of the proclamation, have you?
  POMPEY. All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be pluck'd down.
  POMPEY. They shall stand for seed; they had gone down too, but that
    a wise burgher put in for them.
  POMPEY. To the ground, mistress.
  POMPEY. Come, fear not you: good counsellors lack no clients.
    Though you change your place you need not change your trade; I'll
    be your tapster still. Courage, there will be pity taken on you;
    you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you will
    be considered.
  POMPEY. Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the provost to prison;
    and there's Madam Juliet.                             Exeunt
            Enter PROVOST, CLAUDIO, JULIET, and OFFICERS;
                            LUCIO following
  POMPEY. He cannot, sir; he's out at elbow.
  POMPEY. Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.
  POMPEY. Sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving your
    honour's reverence, for stew'd prunes. Sir, we had but two in the
    house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were, in a
    fruit dish, a dish of some three pence; your honours have seen
    such dishes; they are not China dishes, but very good dishes.
  POMPEY. No, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in the
    right; but to the point. As I say, this Mistress Elbow, being, as
    I say, with child, and being great-bellied, and longing, as I
    said, for prunes; and having but two in the dish, as I said,  
    Master Froth here, this very man, having eaten the rest, as I
    said, and, as I say, paying for them very honestly; for, as you
    know, Master Froth, I could not give you three pence again-
  POMPEY. Very well; you being then, if you be rememb'red, cracking
    the stones of the foresaid prunes-
  POMPEY. Why, very well; I telling you then, if you be rememb'red,
    that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing you
    wot of, unless they kept very good diet, as I told you-
  POMPEY. Why, very well then-
  POMPEY. Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.
  POMPEY. Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's leave. And,
    I beseech you, look into Master Froth here, sir, a man of
    fourscore pound a year; whose father died at Hallowmas- was't not  
    at Hallowmas, Master Froth?
  POMPEY. Why, very well; I hope here be truths. He, sir, sitting, as
    I say, in a lower chair, sir; 'twas in the Bunch of Grapes,
    where, indeed, you have a delight to sit, have you not?
  POMPEY. Why, very well then; I hope here be truths.
  POMPEY. Once?- sir. There was nothing done to her once.
  POMPEY. I beseech your honour, ask me.
  POMPEY. I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face. Good
    Master Froth, look upon his honour; 'tis for a good purpose. Doth  
    your honour mark his face?
  POMPEY. Nay, I beseech you, mark it well.
  POMPEY. Doth your honour see any harm in his face?
  POMPEY. I'll be suppos'd upon a book his face is the worst thing
    about him. Good then; if his face be the worst thing about him,
    how could Master Froth do the constable's wife any harm? I would
    know that of your honour.
  POMPEY. By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected person than
    any of us all.
  POMPEY. Sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.  
  POMPEY. A tapster, a poor widow's tapster.
  POMPEY. Mistress Overdone.
  POMPEY. Nine, sir; Overdone by the last.
  POMPEY. Pompey.
  POMPEY. Bum, sir.
  POMPEY. Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.
  POMPEY. If the law would allow it, sir.
  POMPEY. Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of
    the city?
  POMPEY. Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then. If
    your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves, you
    need not to fear the bawds.
  POMPEY. If you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten
    year together, you'll be glad to give out a commission for more  
    heads; if this law hold in Vienna ten year, I'll rent the fairest
    house in it, after threepence a bay. If you live to see this come
    to pass, say Pompey told you so.
  POMPEY. I thank your worship for your good counsel; [Aside] but I
    shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better determine.
    Whip me? No, no; let carman whip his jade;
    The valiant heart's not whipt out of his trade.         Exit
  POMPEY. 'Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the merriest
    was put down, and the worser allow'd by order of law a furr'd
    gown to keep him warm; and furr'd with fox on lamb-skins too, to
    signify that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the
    facing.
  POMPEY. Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet, sir,
    I would prove-
  POMPEY. I spy comfort; I cry bail. Here's a gentleman, and a friend
    of mine.
  POMPEY. Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is
    herself in the tub.
  POMPEY. Yes, faith, sir.
  POMPEY. I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
  POMPEY. You will not bail me then, sir?
  POMPEY. If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a
    married man, he's his wife's head, and I can never cut of a
    woman's head.
  POMPEY. Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind; but yet
    I will be content to be a lawful hangman. I would be glad to
    receive some instructions from my fellow partner.
  POMPEY. Pray, sir, by your good favour- for surely, sir, a good
    favour you have but that you have a hanging look- do you call,
    sir, your occupation a mystery?
  POMPEY. Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery; and your
    whores, sir, being members of my occupation, using painting, do
    prove my occupation a mystery; but what mystery there should be
    in hanging, if I should be hang'd, I cannot imagine.
  POMPEY. Proof?  
  POMPEY. Sir, I will serve him; for I do find your hangman is a more
    penitent trade than your bawd; he doth oftener ask forgiveness.
  POMPEY. I do desire to learn, sir; and I hope, if you have occasion
    to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare; for truly,
    sir, for your kindness I owe you a good turn.
  POMPEY. I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house of
    profession; one would think it were Mistress Overdone's own
    house, for here be many of her old customers. First, here's young
    Master Rash; he's in for a commodity of brown paper and old
    ginger, nine score and seventeen pounds, of which he made five
    marks ready money. Marry, then ginger was not much in request,
    for the old women were all dead. Then is there here one Master
    Caper, at the suit of Master Threepile the mercer, for some four
    suits of peach-colour'd satin, which now peaches him a beggar.
    Then have we here young Dizy, and young Master Deepvow, and
    Master Copperspur, and Master Starvelackey, the rapier and dagger
    man, and young Dropheir that kill'd lusty Pudding, and Master
    Forthlight the tilter, and brave Master Shootie the great
    traveller, and wild Halfcan that stabb'd Pots, and, I think,
    forty more- all great doers in our trade, and are now 'for the
    Lord's sake.'
  
                            Enter ABHORSON
  POMPEY. Master Barnardine! You must rise and be hang'd, Master
    Barnardine!
  POMPEY. Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be so good, sir,
    to rise and be put to death.
  POMPEY. Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are executed, and
    sleep afterwards.
  POMPEY. He is coming, sir, he is coming; I hear his straw rustle.
                             Enter BARNARDINE
  POMPEY. Very ready, sir.
  POMPEY. O, the better, sir! For he that drinks all night and is
    hanged betimes in the morning may sleep the sounder all the next
    day.
                  Enter DUKE, disguised as before
