  DIANA. They say the French count has done most honourable service.
  DIANA. You shall not need to fear me.
            Enter HELENA in the dress of a pilgrim
  DIANA. The Count Rousillon. Know you such a one?
  DIANA. What some'er he is,
    He's bravely taken here. He stole from France,
    As 'tis reported, for the King had married him  
    Against his liking. Think you it is so?
  DIANA. There is a gentleman that serves the Count
    Reports but coarsely of her.
  DIANA. Monsieur Parolles.
  DIANA. Alas, poor lady!
    'Tis a hard bondage to become the wife
    Of a detesting lord.
  DIANA. He-
    That with the plume; 'tis a most gallant fellow.
    I would he lov'd his wife; if he were honester
    He were much goodlier. Is't not a handsome gentleman?
  DIANA. 'Tis pity he is not honest. Yond's that same knave
    That leads him to these places; were I his lady
    I would poison that vile rascal.
  DIANA. That jack-an-apes with scarfs. Why is he melancholy?
  DIANA. No, my good lord, Diana.
  DIANA. She then was honest.
  DIANA. No.
    My mother did but duty; such, my lord,
    As you owe to your wife.
  DIANA. Ay, so you serve us
    Till we serve you; but when you have our roses
    You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves,
    And mock us with our bareness.
  DIANA. 'Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
    But the plain single vow that is vow'd true.
    What is not holy, that we swear not by,
    But take the High'st to witness. Then, pray you, tell me:
    If I should swear by Jove's great attributes
    I lov'd you dearly, would you believe my oaths
    When I did love you ill? This has no holding,
    To swear by him whom I protest to love
    That I will work against him. Therefore your oaths
    Are words and poor conditions, but unseal'd-
    At least in my opinion.  
  DIANA. I see that men make ropes in such a scarre
    That we'll forsake ourselves. Give me that ring.
  DIANA. Will you not, my lord?
  DIANA. Mine honour's such a ring:
    My chastity's the jewel of our house,
    Bequeathed down from many ancestors;
    Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world  
    In me to lose. Thus your own proper wisdom
    Brings in the champion Honour on my part
    Against your vain assault.
  DIANA. When midnight comes, knock at my chamber window;
    I'll order take my mother shall not hear.
    Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
    When you have conquer'd my yet maiden bed,
    Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me:
    My reasons are most strong; and you shall know them
    When back again this ring shall be deliver'd.
    And on your finger in the night I'll put
    Another ring, that what in time proceeds
    May token to the future our past deeds.
    Adieu till then; then fail not. You have won
    A wife of me, though there my hope be done.
  DIANA. For which live long to thank both heaven and me!
    You may so in the end.
    My mother told me just how he would woo,
    As if she sat in's heart; she says all men
    Have the like oaths. He had sworn to marry me
    When his wife's dead; therefore I'll lie with him
    When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid,
    Marry that will, I live and die a maid.
    Only, in this disguise, I think't no sin
    To cozen him that would unjustly win.                   Exit
ACT IV. SCENE 3.
The Florentine camp
Enter the two FRENCH LORDS, and two or three SOLDIERS
  DIANA. Let death and honesty
    Go with your impositions, I am yours
    Upon your will to suffer.
  DIANA. I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine,
    Derived from the ancient Capilet.
    My suit, as I do understand, you know,
    And therefore know how far I may be pitied.
  DIANA. Why do you look so strange upon your wife?
  DIANA. If you shall marry,
    You give away this hand, and that is mine;
    You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine;
    You give away myself, which is known mine;
    For I by vow am so embodied yours
    That she which marries you must marry me,
    Either both or none.
  DIANA. Good my lord,
    Ask him upon his oath if he does think
    He had not my virginity.
  DIANA. He does me wrong, my lord; if I were so
    He might have bought me at a common price.
    Do not believe him. o, behold this ring,
    Whose high respect and rich validity
    Did lack a parallel; yet, for all that,
    He gave it to a commoner o' th' camp,
    If I be one.
  DIANA. I did, my lord, but loath am to produce
    So bad an instrument; his name's Parolles.
  DIANA. I must be patient.
    You that have turn'd off a first so noble wife
    May justly diet me. I pray you yet-
    Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband-
    Send for your ring, I will return it home,
    And give me mine again.
  DIANA. Sir, much like
    The same upon your finger.
  DIANA. And this was it I gave him, being abed.
  DIANA. I have spoke the truth.
                       Enter PAROLLES
  
  DIANA. Ay, my lord.
  DIANA. Do you know he promis'd me marriage?
  DIANA. Ay, my good lord.
  DIANA. It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.
  DIANA. It was not lent me neither.
  DIANA. I found it not.
  DIANA. I never gave it him.
  DIANA. It might be yours or hers, for aught I know.
  DIANA. I'll never tell you.
  DIANA. I'll put in bail, my liege.
  DIANA. By Jove, if ever I knew man, 'twas you.
  DIANA. Because he's guilty, and he is not guilty.
    He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to't:  
    I'll swear I am a maid, and he knows not.
    Great King, I am no strumpet, by my life;
    I am either maid, or else this old man's wife.
                                             [Pointing to LAFEU]
  DIANA. Good mother, fetch my bail. Stay, royal sir;
                                                      Exit WIDOW
    The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for,
    And he shall surety me. But for this lord
    Who hath abus'd me as he knows himself,
    Though yet he never harm'd me, here I quit him.
    He knows himself my bed he hath defil'd;
    And at that time he got his wife with child.
    Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick;
    So there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick-
    And now behold the meaning.
                     Re-enter WIDOW with HELENA
