  PAROLLES. Save you, fair queen!
  PAROLLES. No.
  PAROLLES. Are you meditating on virginity?
  PAROLLES. Keep him out.
  PAROLLES. There is none. Man, setting down before you, will
    undermine you and blow you up.
  PAROLLES. Virginity being blown down, man will quicklier be blown  
    up; marry, in blowing him down again, with the breach yourselves
     made, you lose your city. It is not politic in the commonwealth
    of nature to preserve virginity. Loss of virginity is rational
    increase; and there was never virgin got till virginity was first
    lost. That you were made of is metal to make virgins. Virginity
    by being once lost may be ten times found; by being ever kept, it
    is ever lost. 'Tis too cold a companion; away with't.
  PAROLLES. There's little can be said in 't; 'tis against the rule
    of nature. To speak on the part of virginity is to accuse your
    mothers; which is most infallible disobedience. He that hangs
    himself is a virgin; virginity murders itself, and should be
    buried in highways, out of all sanctified limit, as a desperate
    offendress against nature. Virginity breeds mites, much like a
    cheese; consumes itself to the very paring, and so dies with
    feeding his own stomach. Besides, virginity is peevish, proud,
    idle, made of self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the
    canon. Keep it not; you cannot choose but lose by't. Out with't.
    Within ten year it will make itself ten, which is a goodly  
    increase; and the principal itself not much the worse. Away
    with't.
  PAROLLES. Let me see. Marry, ill to like him that ne'er it likes.
    'Tis a commodity will lose the gloss with lying; the longer kept,
    the less worth. Off with't while 'tis vendible; answer the time
    of request. Virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap out of
    fashion, richly suited but unsuitable; just like the brooch and
    the toothpick, which wear not now. Your date is better in your
    pie and your porridge than in your cheek. And your virginity,
    your old virginity, is like one of our French wither'd pears: it
    looks ill, it eats drily; marry, 'tis a wither'd pear; it was
    formerly better; marry, yet 'tis a wither'd pear. Will you
    anything with it?
  PAROLLES. What one, i' faith?
  PAROLLES. What's pity?
  PAROLLES. Little Helen, farewell; if I can remember thee, I will
    think of thee at court.
  PAROLLES. Under Mars, I.
  PAROLLES. Why under Man?
  PAROLLES. When he was predominant.
  PAROLLES. Why think you so?
  PAROLLES. That's for advantage.
  PAROLLES. I am so full of business I cannot answer thee acutely. I
    will return perfect courtier; in the which my instruction shall
    serve to naturalize thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtier's
    counsel, and understand what advice shall thrust upon thee; else  
    thou diest in thine unthankfulness, and thine ignorance makes
    thee away. Farewell. When thou hast leisure, say thy prayers;
    when thou hast none, remember thy friends. Get thee a good
    husband and use him as he uses thee. So, farewell.
 Exit
  PAROLLES. 'Tis not his fault, the spark.
    SECOND LORD. O, 'tis brave wars!
  PAROLLES. Most admirable! I have seen those wars.
  PAROLLES. Most admirable! I have seen those wars.
  PAROLLES. An thy mind stand to 't, boy, steal away bravely.
  PAROLLES. Commit it, Count.
  PAROLLES. Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. Good sparks and
    lustrous, a word, good metals: you shall find in the regiment of
    the Spinii one Captain Spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of
    war, here on his sinister cheek; it was this very sword
    entrench'd it. Say to him I live; and observe his reports for me.
  PAROLLES. Mars dote on you for his novices!       Exeunt LORDS
    What will ye do?
                            Re-enter the KING
  PAROLLES. Use a more spacious ceremony to the noble lords; you have
    restrain'd yourself within the list of too cold an adieu. Be more
    expressive to them; for they wear themselves in the cap of the
    time; there do muster true gait; eat, speak, and move, under the
    influence of the most receiv'd star; and though the devil lead
    the measure, such are to be followed. After them, and take a more
    dilated farewell.
  PAROLLES. Worthy fellows; and like to prove most sinewy sword-men.
                                     Exeunt BERTRAM and PAROLLES
                              Enter LAFEU
  PAROLLES. Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath shot
    out in our latter times.
  PAROLLES. So I say-both of Galen and Paracelsus.
  PAROLLES. Right; so I say.
  PAROLLES. Why, there 'tis; so say I too.
  PAROLLES. Right; as 'twere a man assur'd of a-
  PAROLLES. Just; you say well; so would I have said.
  PAROLLES. It is indeed. If you will have it in showing, you shall
    read it in what-do-ye-call't here.
  PAROLLES. That's it; I would have said the very same.
  PAROLLES. Nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange; that is the brief
    and the tedious of it; and he's of a most facinerious spirit that
    will not acknowledge it to be the-
  PAROLLES. Ay; so I say.
  PAROLLES. And debile minister, great power, great transcendence;
    which should, indeed, give us a further use to be made than alone
    the recov'ry of the King, as to be-
  PAROLLES. I would have said it; you say well. Here comes the King.
  PAROLLES. Mort du vinaigre! Is not this Helen?
  PAROLLES. Your pleasure, sir?  
  PAROLLES. Recantation! My Lord! my master!
  PAROLLES. A most harsh one, and not to be understood without bloody
    succeeding. My master!
  PAROLLES. To any count; to all counts; to what is man.
  PAROLLES. You are too old, sir; let it satisfy you, you are too
    old.
  PAROLLES. What I dare too well do, I dare not do.
  PAROLLES. Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity upon thee-
  PAROLLES. My lord, you give me most egregious indignity.
  PAROLLES. I have not, my lord, deserv'd it.
  PAROLLES. Well, I shall be wiser.
  PAROLLES. My lord, you do me most insupportable vexation.
  PAROLLES. Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace off me:
    scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy lord! Well, I must be patient; there
    is no fettering of authority. I'll beat him, by my life, if I can
    meet him with any convenience, an he were double and double a
    lord. I'll have no more pity of his age than I would have of-
    I'll beat him, and if I could but meet him again.
                         Re-enter LAFEU
  PAROLLES. I most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to make some
    reservation of your wrongs. He is my good lord: whom I serve
    above is my master.
  PAROLLES. Ay, sir.
  PAROLLES. This is hard and undeserved measure, my lord.
  PAROLLES. Good, very, good, it is so then. Good, very good; let it
    be conceal'd awhile.
  PAROLLES. What's the matter, sweetheart?
  PAROLLES. What, what, sweetheart?  
  PAROLLES. France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits
    The tread of a man's foot. To th' wars!
  PAROLLES. Ay, that would be known. To th' wars, my boy, to th'
      wars!
    He wears his honour in a box unseen
    That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
    Spending his manly marrow in her arms,
    Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
    Of Mars's fiery steed. To other regions!
    France is a stable; we that dwell in't jades;
    Therefore, to th' war!
  PAROLLES. Will this capriccio hold in thee, art sure?
  PAROLLES. Why, these balls bound; there's noise in it. 'Tis hard:
    A young man married is a man that's marr'd.
    Therefore away, and leave her bravely; go.
    The King has done you wrong; but, hush, 'tis so.      Exeunt
ACT II. SCENE 4.
Paris. The KING'S palace
Enter HELENA and CLOWN
  PAROLLES. Bless you, my fortunate lady!
  PAROLLES. You had my prayers to lead them on; and to keep them on,  
    have them still. O, my knave, how does my old lady?
  PAROLLES. Why, I say nothing.
  PAROLLES. Away! th'art a knave.
  PAROLLES. Go to, thou art a witty fool; I have found thee.
  PAROLLES. A good knave, i' faith, and well fed.
    Madam, my lord will go away to-night:
    A very serious business calls on him.
    The great prerogative and rite of love,  
    Which, as your due, time claims, he does acknowledge;
    But puts it off to a compell'd restraint;
    Whose want, and whose delay, is strew'd with sweets,
    Which they distil now in the curbed time,
    To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy
    And pleasure drown the brim.
  PAROLLES. That you will take your instant leave o' th' King,
    And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
    Strength'ned with what apology you think
    May make it probable need.
  PAROLLES. That, having this obtain'd, you presently
    Attend his further pleasure.
  PAROLLES. I shall report it so.
  PAROLLES.  [To BERTRAM]  These things shall be done, sir.
  PAROLLES. Sir!  
  PAROLLES. She is.
  PAROLLES. As you'll have her.
  PAROLLES. I know not how I have deserved to run into my lord's
    displeasure.
  PAROLLES. An idle lord, I swear.
  PAROLLES. Why, do you not know him?
  PAROLLES. Bravely, coragio!                             Exeunt
ACT III. SCENE 1.
Florence. The DUKE's palace
        Flourish. Enter the DUKE OF FLORENCE, attended; two
               FRENCH LORDS, with a TROOP OF SOLDIERS
  PAROLLES. Lose our drum! well.
  PAROLLES. But a drum! Is't but a drum? A drum so lost! There was
    excellent command: to charge in with our horse upon our own
    wings, and to rend our own soldiers!
  PAROLLES. It might have been recovered.
  PAROLLES. It is to be recovered. But that the merit of service is
    seldom attributed to the true and exact performer, I would have
    that drum or another, or 'hic jacet.'
  PAROLLES. By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it.
  PAROLLES. I'll about it this evening; and I will presently pen
    down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my certainty, put myself
    into my mortal preparation; and by midnight look to hear further
    from me.
  PAROLLES. I know not what the success will be, my lord, but the
    attempt I vow.
  PAROLLES. I love not many words.                          Exit
  PAROLLES. Ten o'clock. Within these three hours 'twill be time
    enough to go home. What shall I say I have done? It must be a
    very plausive invention that carries it. They begin to smoke me;
    and disgraces have of late knock'd to often at my door. I find my
    tongue is too foolhardy; but my heart hath the fear of Mars
    before it, and of his creatures, not daring the reports of my
    tongue.
  PAROLLES. What the devil should move me to undertake the recovery
    of this drum, being not ignorant of the impossibility, and
    knowing I had no such purpose? I must give myself some hurts, and
    say I got them in exploit. Yet slight ones will not carry it.
    They will say 'Came you off with so little?' And great ones I
    dare not give. Wherefore, what's the instance? Tongue, I must put  
    you into a butterwoman's mouth, and buy myself another of
    Bajazet's mule, if you prattle me into these perils.
  PAROLLES. I would the cutting of my garments would serve the turn,
    or the breaking of my Spanish sword.
  PAROLLES. Or the baring of my beard; and to say it was in
    stratagem.
  PAROLLES. Or to drown my clothes, and say I was stripp'd.
  PAROLLES. Though I swore I leap'd from the window of the citadel-
  PAROLLES. Thirty fathom.
  PAROLLES. I would I had any drum of the enemy's; I would swear I
    recover'd it.
  PAROLLES. A drum now of the enemy's!  
  PAROLLES. O, ransom, ransom! Do not hide mine eyes.
                                            [They blindfold him]
  PAROLLES. I know you are the Muskos' regiment,
    And I shall lose my life for want of language.
    If there be here German, or Dane, Low Dutch,
    Italian, or French, let him speak to me;
    I'll discover that which shall undo the Florentine.
  PAROLLES. O!
  PAROLLES. O, let me live,
    And all the secrets of our camp I'll show,
    Their force, their purposes. Nay, I'll speak that
    Which you will wonder at.
  PAROLLES. If I do not, damn me.
  PAROLLES. I will confess what I know without constraint; if ye
    pinch me like a pasty, I can say no more.
  PAROLLES. And truly, as I hope to live.
  PAROLLES. Five or six thousand; but very weak and unserviceable.
    The troops are all scattered, and the commanders very poor
    rogues, upon my reputation and credit, and as I hope to live.
  PAROLLES. Do; I'll take the sacrament on 't, how and which way you
    will.
  PAROLLES. 'Five or six thousand horse' I said-I will say true- 'or
    thereabouts' set down, for I'll speak truth.
  PAROLLES. 'Poor rogues' I pray you say.
  PAROLLES. I humbly thank you, sir. A truth's a truth-the rogues are
    marvellous poor.
  PAROLLES. By my troth, sir, if I were to live this present hour, I
    will tell true. Let me see: Spurio, a hundred and fifty;
    Sebastian, so many; Corambus, so many; Jaques, so many; Guiltian,
    Cosmo, Lodowick, and Gratii, two hundred fifty each; mine own
    company, Chitopher, Vaumond, Bentii, two hundred fifty each; so
    that the muster-file, rotten and sound, upon my life, amounts not
    to fifteen thousand poll; half of the which dare not shake the
    snow from off their cassocks lest they shake themselves to
    pieces.  
  PAROLLES. I beseech you, let me answer to the particular of the
    inter'gatories. Demand them singly.
  PAROLLES. I know him: 'a was a botcher's prentice in Paris, from
    whence he was whipt for getting the shrieve's fool with child-a
    dumb innocent that could not say him nay.
  PAROLLES. Upon my knowledge, he is, and lousy.  
  PAROLLES. The Duke knows him for no other but a poor officer of
    mine; and writ to me this other day to turn him out o' th' band.
    I think I have his letter in my pocket.
  PAROLLES. In good sadness, I do not know; either it is there or it
    is upon a file with the Duke's other letters in my tent.
  PAROLLES. I do not know if it be it or no.
  PAROLLES. That is not the Duke's letter, sir; that is an
    advertisement to a proper maid in Florence, one Diana, to take
    heed of the allurement of one Count Rousillon, a foolish idle
    boy, but for all that very ruttish. I pray you, sir, put it up
    again.  
  PAROLLES. My meaning in't, I protest, was very honest in the behalf
    of the maid; for I knew the young Count to be a dangerous and
    lascivious boy, who is a whale to virginity, and devours up all
    the fry it finds.
  PAROLLES. My life, sir, in any case! Not that I am afraid to die,
    but that, my offences being many, I would repent out the
    remainder of nature. Let me live, sir, in a dungeon, i' th'
    stocks, or anywhere, so I may live.
  PAROLLES. He will steal, sir, an egg out of a cloister; for rapes
    and ravishments he parallels Nessus. He professes not keeping of
    oaths; in breaking 'em he is stronger than Hercules. He will lie,
    sir, with such volubility that you would think truth were a fool.
    Drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will be swine-drunk; and
    in his sleep he does little harm, save to his bedclothes about
    him; but they know his conditions and lay him in straw. I have  
    but little more to say, sir, of his honesty. He has everything
    that an honest man should not have; what an honest man should
    have he has nothing.
  PAROLLES. Faith, sir, has led the drum before the English
    tragedians-to belie him I will not-and more of his soldier-ship
    I know not, except in that country he had the honour to be the
    officer at a place there called Mile-end to instruct for the
    doubling of files-I would do the man what honour I can-but of
    this I am not certain.
  PAROLLES. Sir, for a cardecue he will sell the fee-simple of his
    salvation, the inheritance of it; and cut th' entail from all  
    remainders and a perpetual succession for it perpetually.
  PAROLLES. E'en a crow o' th' same nest; not altogether so great as
    the first in goodness, but greater a great deal in evil. He
    excels his brother for a coward; yet his brother is reputed one
    of the best that is. In a retreat he outruns any lackey: marry,
    in coming on he has the cramp.
  PAROLLES. Ay, and the Captain of his Horse, Count Rousillon.
  PAROLLES.  [Aside]  I'll no more drumming. A plague of all drums!
    Only to seem to deserve well, and to beguile the supposition of
    that lascivious young boy the Count, have I run into this danger.
    Yet who would have suspected an ambush where I was taken?
  PAROLLES. O Lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death!
  PAROLLES. Who cannot be crush'd with a plot?
  PAROLLES. Yet am I thankful. If my heart were great,
    'Twould burst at this. Captain I'll be no more;
    But I will eat, and drink, and sleep as soft
    As captain shall. Simply the thing I am
    Shall make me live. Who knows himself a braggart,
    Let him fear this; for it will come to pass
    That every braggart shall be found an ass.
    Rust, sword; cool, blushes; and, Parolles, live
    Safest in shame. Being fool'd, by fool'ry thrive.
    There's place and means for every man alive.
    I'll after them.                                        Exit
ACT IV SCENE 4.
The WIDOW'S house
Enter HELENA, WIDOW, and DIANA
  PAROLLES. Good Monsieur Lavache, give my Lord Lafeu this letter. I
    have ere now, sir, been better known to you, when I have held
    familiarity with fresher clothes; but I am now, sir, muddied in
    Fortune's mood, and smell somewhat strong of her strong
    displeasure.
  PAROLLES. Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir; I spake but by
    a metaphor.
  PAROLLES. Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.
  PAROLLES. My lord, I am a man whom Fortune hath cruelly scratch'd.
  PAROLLES. I beseech your honour to hear me one single word.
  PAROLLES. My name, my good lord, is Parolles.
  PAROLLES. O my good lord, you were the first that found me.
  PAROLLES. It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some grace, for
    you did bring me out.
  PAROLLES. I praise God for you.                         Exeunt
ACT V SCENE 3.
Rousillon. The COUNT'S palace
Flourish. Enter KING, COUNTESS, LAFEU, the two FRENCH LORDS, with ATTENDANTS
  PAROLLES. So please your Majesty, my master hath been an honourable
    gentleman; tricks he hath had in him, which gentlemen have.
  PAROLLES. Faith, sir, he did love her; but how?
  PAROLLES. He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a woman.
  PAROLLES. He lov'd her, sir, and lov'd her not.
  PAROLLES. I am a poor man, and at your Majesty's command.
  PAROLLES. Faith, I know more than I'll speak.
  PAROLLES. Yes, so please your Majesty. I did go between them, as I
    said; but more than that, he loved her-for indeed he was mad for
    her, and talk'd of Satan, and of Limbo, and of Furies, and I know
    not what. Yet I was in that credit with them at that time that I
    knew of their going to bed; and of other motions, as promising
    her marriage, and things which would derive me ill will to speak
    of; therefore I will not speak what I know.
