  AUMERLE. Yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.
  AUMERLE. Why then, the champions are prepar'd, and stay
    For nothing but his Majesty's approach.
     The trumpets sound, and the KING enters with his nobles,
     GAUNT, BUSHY, BAGOT, GREEN, and others. When they are set,
     enter MOWBRAY, Duke of Nor folk, in arms, defendant, and
     a HERALD
  AUMERLE. Cousin, farewell; what presence must not know,
    From where you do remain let paper show.
  AUMERLE. I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,
    But to the next high way, and there I left him.
  AUMERLE. Faith, none for me; except the north-east wind,
    Which then blew bitterly against our faces,
    Awak'd the sleeping rheum, and so by chance
    Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.
  AUMERLE. 'Farewell.'
    And, for my heart disdained that my tongue
    Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
    To counterfeit oppression of such grief
    That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave.
    Marry, would the word 'farewell' have length'ned hours  
    And added years to his short banishment,
    He should have had a volume of farewells;
    But since it would not, he had none of me.
  AUMERLE. Yea, my lord. How brooks your Grace the air
    After your late tossing on the breaking seas?
  AUMERLE. He means, my lord, that we are too remiss;
    Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,
    Grows strong and great in substance and in power.
  AUMERLE. Comfort, my liege, why looks your Grace so pale?
  AUMERLE. Comfort, my liege; remember who you are.
  AUMERLE. Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?
  AUMERLE. Where is the Duke my father with his power?
  AUMERLE. My father hath a power; inquire of him,
    And learn to make a body of a limb.
  AUMERLE. My liege, one word.
  AUMERLE. No, good my lord; let's fight with gentle words
    Till time lend friends, and friends their helpful swords.
  AUMERLE. Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.
  AUMERLE. Princes, and noble lords,
    What answer shall I make to this base man?
    Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars
    On equal terms to give him chastisement?
    Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd
    With the attainder of his slanderous lips.
    There is my gage, the manual seal of death
    That marks thee out for hell. I say thou liest,
    And will maintain what thou hast said is false
    In thy heart-blood, through being all too base
    To stain the temper of my knightly sword.
  AUMERLE. Excepting one, I would he were the best
    In all this presence that hath mov'd me so.
  AUMERLE. Thou dar'st not, coward, live to see that day.
  AUMERLE. Fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this.
  AUMERLE. An if I do not, may my hands rot of
    And never brandish more revengeful steel
    Over the glittering helmet of my foe!
  AUMERLE. Who sets me else? By heaven, I'll throw at all!
    I have a thousand spirits in one breast
    To answer twenty thousand such as you.
  AUMERLE. Some honest Christian trust me with a gage
    That Norfolk lies. Here do I throw down this,
    If he may be repeal'd to try his honour.
  AUMERLE. You holy clergymen, is there no plot
    To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?
  AUMERLE. Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not.
    God knows I had as lief be none as one.
  AUMERLE. For aught I know, my lord, they do.
  AUMERLE. If God prevent not, I purpose so.
  AUMERLE. My lord, 'tis nothing.
  AUMERLE. I do beseech your Grace to pardon me;
    It is a matter of small consequence
    Which for some reasons I would not have seen.
  AUMERLE. I do beseech you, pardon me; I may not show it.  
  AUMERLE. Good mother, be content; it is no more
    Than my poor life must answer.  
  AUMERLE. Where is the King?
  AUMERLE. God save your Grace! I do beseech your Majesty,
    To have some conference with your Grace alone.
  AUMERLE. For ever may my knees grow to the earth,
                                                    [Kneels]
    My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth,
    Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.  
  AUMERLE. Then give me leave that I may turn the key,
    That no man enter till my tale be done.
  AUMERLE. Stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.
  AUMERLE. Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd.
    I do repent me; read not my name there;
    My heart is not confederate with my hand.
  AUMERLE. Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee.
                                                     [Kneels]
