  PAGE.  [Within]  Who's there?
                            Enter PAGE
  PAGE. I am glad to see your worships well. I thank you for
    my venison, Master Shallow.
  PAGE. Sir, I thank you.
  PAGE. I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.
  PAGE. It could not be judg'd, sir.
  PAGE. A cur, sir.
  PAGE. Sir, he is within; and I would I could do a good office
    between you.
  PAGE. Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.
  PAGE. Here comes Sir John.
      Enter SIR JOHN FALSTAFF, BARDOLPH, NYM, and PISTOL
  PAGE. We three to hear it and end it between them.
  PAGE. Nay, daughter, carry the wine in; we'll drink within.
                                                  Exit ANNE PAGE
  PAGE. How now, Mistress Ford!
  PAGE. Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a
    hot venison pasty to dinner; come, gentlemen, I hope we
    shall drink down all unkindness.
                      Exeunt all but SHALLOW, SLENDER, and EVANS
  PAGE. Come, gentle Master Slender, come; we stay for you.
  PAGE. By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! Come,
    come.
  PAGE. Come on, sir.
  PAGE. 'The humour of it,' quoth 'a! Here's a fellow frights
    English out of his wits.
  PAGE. I never heard such a drawling, affecting rogue.
  PAGE. I will not believe such a Cataian though the priest o'  
    th' town commended him for a true man.
  PAGE. How now, Meg!
  PAGE. How now, Master Ford!
  PAGE. Yes; and you heard what the other told me?
  PAGE. Hang 'em, slaves! I do not think the knight would offer it;
    but these that accuse him in his intent towards our
    wives are a yoke of his discarded men; very rogues, now
    they be out of service.
  PAGE. Marry, were they.
  PAGE. Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend this voyage
    toward my wife, I would turn her loose to him; and what
    he gets more of her than sharp words, let it lie on my head.  
  PAGE. Look where my ranting host of the Garter comes.
    There is either liquor in his pate or money in his purse
    when he looks so merrily. How now, mine host!
  PAGE. I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill in his
    rapier.
  PAGE. Have with you. I had rather hear them scold than
    fight.                                   Exeunt all but FORD
  PAGE. Now, good Master Doctor!
  PAGE. Master Shallow, you have yourself been a great fighter,
    though now a man of peace.
  PAGE. 'Tis true, Master Shallow.
  PAGE.  [Aside]  Sir Hugh is there, is he?
  PAGE. Save you, good Sir Hugh!
  PAGE. And youthful still, in your doublet and hose, this raw
    rheumatic day!
  PAGE. We are come to you to do a good office, Master
    Parson.
  PAGE. Yonder is a most reverend gentleman, who, belike having
    received wrong by some person, is at most odds with
    his own gravity and patience that ever you saw.  
  PAGE. I think you know him: Master Doctor Caius, the
    renowned French physician.
  PAGE. Why?
  PAGE. I warrant you, he's the man should fight with him.
  PAGE. Nay, good Master Parson, keep in your weapon.  
  PAGE. You have, Master Slender; I stand wholly for you. But
    my wife, Master Doctor, is for you altogether.
  PAGE. Not by my consent, I promise you. The gentleman is
    of no having: he kept company with the wild Prince and
    Poins; he is of too high a region, he knows too much. No,
    he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes with the finger of
    my substance; if he take her, let him take her simply; the
    wealth I have waits on my consent, and my consent goes
    not that way.
  PAGE. Good Master Ford, be contented; you wrong yourself
    too much.
  PAGE. Nay, follow him, gentlemen; see the issue of his
    search.                        Exeunt EVANS, PAGE, and CAIUS
  PAGE. Fie, fie, Master Ford, are you not asham'd? What
    spirit, what devil suggests this imagination? I would not ha'
    your distemper in this kind for the wealth of Windsor
    Castle.
  PAGE. Let's go in, gentlemen; but, trust me, we'll mock him.
    I do invite you to-morrow morning to my house to breakfast;
    after, we'll a-birding together; I have a fine hawk for
    the bush. Shall it be so?
  PAGE. Now, Master Slender! Love him, daughter Anne-
    Why, how now, what does Master Fenton here?
    You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house.  
    I told you, sir, my daughter is dispos'd of.
  PAGE. She is no match for you.
  PAGE. No, good Master Fenton.
    Come, Master Shallow; come, son Slender; in.
    Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.
                               Exeunt PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
  PAGE. Why, this passes, Master Ford; you are not to go loose
    any longer; you must be pinion'd.
  PAGE. This passes!
  PAGE. Here's no man.
  PAGE. No, nor nowhere else but in your brain.
  PAGE. Let's obey his humour a little further. Come,
    gentlemen.            Exeunt all but MRS. FORD and MRS. PAGE
  PAGE. And did he send you both these letters at an instant?
  PAGE. 'Tis well, 'tis well; no more.
    Be not as extreme in submission as in offence;
    But let our plot go forward. Let our wives
    Yet once again, to make us public sport,
    Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
    Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.  
  PAGE. How? To send him word they'll meet him in the Park
    at midnight? Fie, fie! he'll never come!
  PAGE. So think I too.
  PAGE. Why yet there want not many that do fear
    In deep of night to walk by this Herne's oak.
    But what of this?
  PAGE. Well, let it not be doubted but he'll come,
    And in this shape. When you have brought him thither,
    What shall be done with him? What is your plot?
  PAGE. That silk will I go buy.  [Aside]  And in that time
    Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away,
    And marry her at Eton.-Go, send to Falstaff straight.
  PAGE. Come, come; we'll couch i' th' Castle ditch till we
    see the light of our fairies. Remember, son Slender, my daughter.
  PAGE. The night is dark; light and spirits will become it well.
    Heaven prosper our sport! No man means evil but the
    devil, and we shall know him by his horns. Let's away;
    follow me.                                            Exeunt
SCENE 3.
A street leading to the Park
Enter MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and DOCTOR CAIUS
  PAGE. Nay, do not fly; I think we have watch'd you now.
    Will none but Heme the Hunter serve your turn?
  PAGE. Old, cold, wither'd, and of intolerable entrails?
  PAGE. And as poor as Job?
  PAGE. Yet be cheerful, knight; thou shalt eat a posset
    tonight at my house, where I will desire thee to laugh at my
    wife, that now laughs at thee. Tell her Master Slender hath
    married her daughter.
  PAGE. Son, how now! how now, son! Have you dispatch'd'?
  PAGE. Of what, son?
  PAGE. Upon my life, then, you took the wrong.
  PAGE. Why, this is your own folly. Did not I tell you how
    you should know my daughter by her garments?
  PAGE. My heart misgives me; here comes Master Fenton.
                  Enter FENTON and ANNE PAGE
    How now, Master Fenton!
  PAGE. Now, Mistress, how chance you went not with Master
    Slender?
  PAGE. Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy!
    What cannot be eschew'd must be embrac'd.
