  BOATSWAIN. Here, master; what cheer?
  BOATSWAIN. Heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts!
    yare, yare! Take in the topsail. Tend to th' master's
    whistle. Blow till thou burst thy wind, if room enough.
          Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, FERDINAND
                     GONZALO, and OTHERS
  BOATSWAIN. I pray now, keep below.
  BOATSWAIN. Do you not hear him? You mar our labour;
    keep your cabins; you do assist the storm.
  BOATSWAIN. When the sea is. Hence! What cares these
    roarers for the name of king? To cabin! silence! Trouble
    us not.
  BOATSWAIN. None that I more love than myself. You are
    counsellor; if you can command these elements to
    silence, and work the peace of the present, we will not
    hand a rope more. Use your authority; if you cannot, give
    thanks you have liv'd so long, and make yourself ready
    in your cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so
    hap.-Cheerly, good hearts!-Out of our way, I say.
 Exit
  BOATSWAIN. Down with the topmast. Yare, lower, lower!
    Bring her to try wi' th' maincourse.  [A cry within]  A
    plague upon this howling! They are louder than the
    weather or our office.
           Re-enter SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, and GONZALO
    Yet again! What do you here? Shall we give o'er, and
    drown? Have you a mind to sink?
  BOATSWAIN. Work you, then.
  BOATSWAIN. Lay her a-hold, a-hold; set her two courses; off
    to sea again; lay her off.
                    Enter MARINERS, Wet
  BOATSWAIN. What, must our mouths be cold?
  BOATSWAIN. The best news is that we have safely found
    Our King and company; the next, our ship-
    Which but three glasses since we gave out split-
    Is tight and yare, and bravely rigg'd, as when  
    We first put out to sea.
  BOATSWAIN. If I did think, sir, I were well awake,
    I'd strive to tell you. We were dead of sleep,
    And-how, we know not-all clapp'd under hatches;
    Where, but even now, with strange and several noises
    Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains,
    And moe diversity of sounds, all horrible,
    We were awak'd; straightway at liberty;
    Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld
    Our royal, good, and gallant ship; our master
    Cap'ring to eye her. On a trice, so please you,
    Even in a dream, were we divided from them,
    And were brought moping hither.
