  MIRANDA. If by your art, my dearest father, you have
    Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.
    The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch,
    But that the sea, mounting to th' welkin's cheek,
    Dashes the fire out. O, I have suffered
    With those that I saw suffer! A brave vessel,
    Who had no doubt some noble creature in her,
    Dash'd all to pieces! O, the cry did knock
    Against my very heart! Poor souls, they perish'd.
    Had I been any god of power, I would
    Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere
    It should the good ship so have swallow'd and
    The fraughting souls within her.
  MIRANDA. O, woe the day!  
  MIRANDA. More to know
    Did never meddle with my thoughts.
  MIRANDA. You have often
    Begun to tell me what I am; but stopp'd,
    And left me to a bootless inquisition,
    Concluding 'Stay; not yet.'
  MIRANDA. Certainly, sir, I can.
  MIRANDA. 'Tis far off,
    And rather like a dream than an assurance
    That my remembrance warrants. Had I not
    Four, or five, women once, that tended me?  
  MIRANDA. But that I do not.
  MIRANDA. Sir, are not you my father?
  MIRANDA. O, the heavens!
    What foul play had we that we came from thence?
    Or blessed was't we did?
  MIRANDA. O, my heart bleeds
    To think o' th' teen that I have turn'd you to,
    Which is from my remembrance. Please you, farther.
  MIRANDA. Sir, most heedfully.
  MIRANDA. O, good sir, I do!
  MIRANDA. Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.
  MIRANDA. O the heavens!
  MIRANDA. I should sin
    To think but nobly of my grandmother:
    Good wombs have borne bad sons.
  MIRANDA. Alack, for pity!
    I, not rememb'ring how I cried out then,
    Will cry it o'er again; it is a hint
    That wrings mine eyes to't.  
  MIRANDA. Wherefore did they not
    That hour destroy us?
  MIRANDA. Alack, what trouble  
    Was I then to you!
  MIRANDA. How came we ashore?
  MIRANDA. Would I might  
    But ever see that man!
  MIRANDA. Heavens thank you for't! And now, I pray you,
      sir,
    For still 'tis beating in my mind, your reason
    For raising this sea-storm?
  MIRANDA. The strangeness of your story put
    Heaviness in me.
  MIRANDA. 'Tis a villain, sir,
    I do not love to look on.
  MIRANDA. Abhorred slave,
    Which any print of goodness wilt not take,
    Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee,
    Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
    One thing or other. When thou didst not, savage,
    Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like
    A thing most brutish, I endow'd thy purposes
    With words that made them known. But thy vile race,
    Though thou didst learn, had that in't which good natures
    Could not abide to be with; therefore wast thou
    Deservedly confin'd into this rock, who hadst  
    Deserv'd more than a prison.
  MIRANDA. What is't? a spirit?
    Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir,
    It carries a brave form. But 'tis a spirit.
  MIRANDA. I might call him
    A thing divine; for nothing natural
    I ever saw so noble.
  MIRANDA. No wonder, sir;
    But certainly a maid.
  MIRANDA. Alack, for mercy!
  MIRANDA. Why speaks my father so ungently? This
    Is the third man that e'er I saw; the first
    That e'er I sigh'd for. Pity move my father
    To be inclin'd my way!
  MIRANDA. There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple.
    If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
    Good things will strive to dwell with't.
  MIRANDA. O dear father,
    Make not too rash a trial of him, for
    He's gentle, and not fearful.
  MIRANDA. Beseech you, father!
  MIRANDA. Sir, have pity;
    I'll be his surety.
  MIRANDA. My affections
    Are then most humble; I have no ambition
    To see a goodlier man.
  MIRANDA. Be of comfort;
    My father's of a better nature, sir,
    Than he appears by speech; this is unwonted
    Which now came from him.
  MIRANDA. Alas, now; pray you,
    Work not so hard; I would the lightning had
    Burnt up those logs that you are enjoin'd to pile.
    Pray, set it down and rest you; when this burns,
    'Twill weep for having wearied you. My father
    Is hard at study; pray, now, rest yourself;
    He's safe for these three hours.
  MIRANDA. If you'll sit down,
    I'll bear your logs the while; pray give me that;
    I'll carry it to the pile.
  MIRANDA. It would become me  
    As well as it does you; and I should do it
    With much more ease; for my good will is to it,
    And yours it is against.
  MIRANDA. You look wearily.
  MIRANDA. Miranda-O my father,
    I have broke your hest to say so!
  MIRANDA. I do not know
    One of my sex; no woman's face remember,
    Save, from my glass, mine own; nor have I seen
    More that I may call men than you, good friend,
    And my dear father. How features are abroad,
    I am skilless of; but, by my modesty,
    The jewel in my dower, I would not wish
    Any companion in the world but you;
    Nor can imagination form a shape,
    Besides yourself, to like of. But I prattle
    Something too wildly, and my father's precepts
    I therein do forget.
  MIRANDA. Do you love me?
  MIRANDA. I am a fool
    To weep at what I am glad of.
  MIRANDA. At mine unworthiness, that dare not offer
    What I desire to give, and much less take
    What I shall die to want. But this is trifling;  
    And all the more it seeks to hide itself,
    The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning!
    And prompt me, plain and holy innocence!
    I am your wife, if you will marry me;
    If not, I'll die your maid. To be your fellow
    You may deny me; but I'll be your servant,
    Whether you will or no.
  MIRANDA. My husband, then?
  MIRANDA. And mine, with my heart in't. And now farewell
    Till half an hour hence.
  MIRANDA. Never till this day
    Saw I him touch'd with anger so distemper'd.
  MIRANDA. Sweet lord, you play me false.
  MIRANDA. Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle
    And I would call it fair play.
  MIRANDA. O, wonder!
    How many goodly creatures are there here!
    How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world
    That has such people in't!
