  FIRST LORD. So 'tis reported, sir.
  FIRST LORD. His love and wisdom,
    Approv'd so to your Majesty, may plead
    For amplest credence.
  FIRST LORD. It is the Count Rousillon, my good lord,
    Young Bertram.
  FIRST LORD. 'Tis our hope, sir,
    After well-ent'red soldiers, to return
    And find your Grace in health.
  FIRST LORD. O my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!
  FIRST LORD. There's honour in the theft.
  FIRST LORD. Farewell, Captain.
  FIRST LORD. We shall, noble Captain.
  FIRST LORD. And grant it.
  FIRST LORD. Holy seems the quarrel
    Upon your Grace's part; black and fearful
    On the opposer.
  FIRST LORD. But I am sure the younger of our nature,
    That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
    Come here for physic.
  FIRST LORD. If your lordship find him not a hiding, hold me no more
    in your respect.
  FIRST LORD. It were fit you knew him; lest, reposing too far in his
    virtue, which he hath not, he might at some great and trusty
    business in a main danger fail you.
  FIRST LORD. None better than to let him fetch off his drum, which
    you hear him so confidently undertake to do.
  FIRST LORD. O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum; he
    says he has a stratagem for't. When your lordship sees the bottom
    of his success in't, and to what metal this counterfeit lump of
    ore will be melted, if you give him not John Drum's
    entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed. Here he comes.
                      Enter PAROLLES
  FIRST LORD. A pox on 't; let it go; 'tis but a drum.
  FIRST LORD. That was not to be blam'd in the command of the
    service; it was a disaster of war that Caesar himself could not
    have prevented, if he had been there to command.
  FIRST LORD. You do not know him, my lord, as we do. Certain it is  
    that he will steal himself into a man's favour, and for a week
    escape a great deal of discoveries; but when you find him out,
    you have him ever after.
  FIRST LORD. We'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case him.
    He was first smok'd by the old Lord Lafeu. When his disguise and
    he is parted, tell me what a sprat you shall find him; which you
    shall see this very night.
  FIRST LORD. But you say she's honest.
  FIRST LORD. With all my heart, my lord.                 Exeunt
ACT III. SCENE 7.
Florence. The WIDOW'S house
Enter HELENA and WIDOW
  FIRST LORD. I have deliv'red it an hour since. There is something
    in't that stings his nature; for on the reading it he chang'd
    almost into another man.
  FIRST LORD. Especially he hath incurred the everlasting displeasure
    of the King, who had even tun'd his bounty to sing happiness to
    him. I will tell you a thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly
    with you.
  FIRST LORD. He hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in Florence,
    of a most chaste renown; and this night he fleshes his will in
    the spoil of her honour. He hath given her his monumental ring,
    and thinks himself made in the unchaste composition.
  FIRST LORD. Merely our own traitors. And as in the common course of
    all treasons we still see them reveal themselves till they attain
    to their abhorr'd ends; so he that in this action contrives
    against his own nobility, in his proper stream, o'erflows
    himself.
  FIRST LORD. Not till after midnight; for he is dieted to his hour.
  FIRST LORD. We will not meddle with him till he come; for his
    presence must be the whip of the other.
  FIRST LORD. I hear there is an overture of peace.
  FIRST LORD. What will Count Rousillon do then? Will he travel
    higher, or return again into France?
  FIRST LORD. Let it be forbid, sir! So should I be a great deal
    of his act.
  FIRST LORD. How is this justified?
  FIRST LORD. Hath the Count all this intelligence?
  FIRST LORD. I am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of this.
  FIRST LORD. And how mightily some other times we drown our gain in
    tears! The great dignity that his valour hath here acquir'd for
    him shall at home be encount'red with a shame as ample.
  FIRST LORD. They cannot be too sweet for the King's tartness.
    Here's his lordship now.
                        Enter BERTRAM  
    How now, my lord, is't not after midnight?
  FIRST LORD. I will never trust a man again for keeping his sword
    clean; nor believe he can have everything in him by wearing his
    apparel neatly.  
  FIRST LORD. This is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold  
    linguist, and the amnipotent soldier.
  FIRST LORD. Why does he ask him of me?
  FIRST LORD. God bless you, Captain Parolles.
  FIRST LORD. Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafeu? I am
    for France.
