  POINS. Is't come to that? I had thought weariness durst not have
    attach'd one of so high blood.
  POINS. Why, a prince should not be so loosely studied as to
    remember so weak a composition.
  POINS. How ill it follows, after you have laboured so hard, you
    should talk so idly! Tell me, how many good young princes would
    do so, their fathers being so sick as yours at this time is?
  POINS. Yes, faith; and let it be an excellent good thing.
  POINS. Go to; I stand the push of your one thing that you will
    tell.
  POINS. Very hardly upon such a subject.  
  POINS. The reason?
  POINS. I would think thee a most princely hypocrite.
  POINS. Why, because you have been so lewd and so much engraffed to
    Falstaff.
  POINS. By this light, I am well spoke on; I can hear it with mine
    own ears. The worst that they can say of me is that I am a second
    brother and that I am a proper fellow of my hands; and those two
    things, I confess, I cannot help. By the mass, here comes  
    Bardolph.
                         Enter BARDOLPH and PAGE
  POINS. Come, you virtuous ass, you bashful fool, must you be
    blushing? Wherefore blush you now? What a maidenly man-at-arms
    are you become! Is't such a matter to get a pottle-pot's
    maidenhead?
  POINS. O that this blossom could be kept from cankers!
    Well, there is sixpence to preserve thee.
  POINS. Deliver'd with good respect. And how doth the martlemas,
    your master?
  POINS. Marry, the immortal part needs a physician; but that moves
    not him. Though that be sick, it dies not.
  POINS.  [Reads]  'John Falstaff, knight'- Every man must know that  
    as oft as he has occasion to name himself, even like those that
    are kin to the King; for they never prick their finger but they
    say 'There's some of the King's blood spilt.' 'How comes that?'
    says he that takes upon him not to conceive. The answer is as
    ready as a borrower's cap: 'I am the King's poor cousin, sir.'
  POINS. Why, this is a certificate.
  POINS. He sure means brevity in breath, short-winded.
  POINS. My lord, I'll steep this letter in sack and make him eat it.
  POINS. God send the wench no worse fortune! But I never said so.
  POINS. I am your shadow, my lord; I'll follow you.
  POINS. I warrant you, as common as the way between Saint Albans and
    London.
  POINS. Put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and wait upon him at
    his table as drawers.
  POINS. Let's beat him before his whore.
  POINS. Is it not strange that desire should so many years outlive
    performance?
  POINS. And look whether the fiery Trigon, his man, be not lisping
    to his master's old tables, his note-book, his counsel-keeper.
  POINS. My lord, he will drive you out of your revenge and turn all
    to a merriment, if you take not the heat.
  POINS. No abuse!
  POINS. Answer, thou dead elm, answer.
