  WARWICK. Many good morrows to your Majesty!
  WARWICK. 'Tis one o'clock, and past.  
  WARWICK. We have, my liege.
  WARWICK. It is but as a body yet distempered;
    Which to his former strength may be restored
    With good advice and little medicine.
    My Lord Northumberland will soon be cool'd.
  WARWICK. There is a history in all men's lives,
    Figuring the natures of the times deceas'd;
    The which observ'd, a man may prophesy,
    With a near aim, of the main chance of things
    As yet not come to life, who in their seeds
    And weak beginning lie intreasured.
    Such things become the hatch and brood of time;
    And, by the necessary form of this,
    King Richard might create a perfect guess
    That great Northumberland, then false to him,
    Would of that seed grow to a greater falseness;
    Which should not find a ground to root upon
    Unless on you.
  WARWICK. It cannot be, my lord.
    Rumour doth double, like the voice and echo,
    The numbers of the feared. Please it your Grace
    To go to bed. Upon my soul, my lord,
    The powers that you already have sent forth
    Shall bring this prize in very easily.
    To comfort you the more, I have receiv'd
    A certain instance that Glendower is dead.
    Your Majesty hath been this fortnight ill;
    And these unseasoned hours perforce must ad
    Unto your sickness.
  WARWICK. Both which we doubt not but your Majesty
    Shall soon enjoy.
  WARWICK. My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite.
    The Prince but studies his companions
    Like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the language,
    'Tis needful that the most immodest word
    Be look'd upon and learnt; which once attain'd,
    Your Highness knows, comes to no further use
    But to be known and hated. So, like gross terms,
    The Prince will, in the perfectness of time,  
    Cast off his followers; and their memory
    Shall as a pattern or a measure live
    By which his Grace must mete the lives of other,
    Turning past evils to advantages.
  WARWICK. Be patient, Princes; you do know these fits
    Are with his Highness very ordinary.
    Stand from him, give him air; he'll straight be well.
  WARWICK. Speak lower, Princes, for the King recovers.
  WARWICK. Call for the music in the other room.
  WARWICK. Less noise! less noise!
                        Enter PRINCE HENRY
  WARWICK. Not so much noise, my lords. Sweet Prince, speak low;
    The King your father is dispos'd to sleep.
  WARWICK. Will't please your Grace to go along with us?
  WARWICK. What would your Majesty? How fares your Grace?
  WARWICK. This door is open; he is gone this way.
  WARWICK. When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.
  WARWICK. My lord, I found the Prince in the next room,
    Washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks,
    With such a deep demeanour in great sorrow,  
    That tyranny, which never quaff'd but blood,
    Would, by beholding him, have wash'd his knife
    With gentle eye-drops. He is coming hither.
  WARWICK. 'Tis call'd Jerusalem, my noble lord.
  WARWICK. How now, my Lord Chief Justice; whither away?
  WARWICK. Exceeding well; his cares are now all ended.
  WARWICK. He's walk'd the way of nature;
    And to our purposes he lives no more.
  WARWICK. Indeed, I think the young king loves you not.
  WARWICK. Here comes the heavy issue of dead Harry.
    O that the living Harry had the temper
    Of he, the worst of these three gentlemen!
    How many nobles then should hold their places
    That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort!
  WARWICK. We do remember; but our argument
    Is all too heavy to admit much talk.
  WARWICK. Here comes the Prince.
            Enter KING HENRY THE FIFTH, attended
