  Pedro. Good Signior Leonato, are you come to meet your trouble? The
    fashion of the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it.
  Pedro. You embrace your charge too willingly. I think this is your
    daughter.
  Pedro. You have it full, Benedick. We may guess by this what you
    are, being a man. Truly the lady fathers herself. Be happy, lady;
    for you are like an honourable father.
  Pedro. That is the sum of all, Leonato. Signior Claudio and Signior
    Benedick, my dear friend Leonato hath invited you all. I tell him
    we shall stay here at the least a month, and he heartly prays  
    some occasion may detain us longer. I dare swear he is no
    hypocrite, but prays from his heart.
  Pedro. Your hand, Leonato. We will go together.
                            Exeunt. Manent Benedick and Claudio.
  Pedro. What secret hath held you here, that you followed not to
    Leonato's?
  Pedro. I charge thee on thy allegiance.
  Pedro. Amen, if you love her; for the lady is very well worthy.
  Pedro. By my troth, I speak my thought.
  Pedro. That she is worthy, I know.
  Pedro. Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of
    beauty.
  Pedro. I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love.
  Pedro. Well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou wilt
    prove a notable argument.
  Pedro. Well, as time shall try.
    'In time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.'
  Pedro. Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in Venice, thou
    wilt quake for this shortly.
  Pedro. Well, you will temporize with the hours. In the meantime,
    good Signior Benedick, repair to Leonato's, commend me to him and
    tell him I will not fail him at supper; for indeed he hath made
    great preparation.
  Pedro. The sixth of July. Your loving friend, Benedick.
  Pedro. My love is thine to teach. Teach it but how,
    And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn
    Any hard lesson that may do thee good.
  Pedro. No child but Hero; she's his only heir.
    Dost thou affect her, Claudio?
  Pedro. Thou wilt be like a lover presently
    And tire the hearer with a book of words.
    If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it,
    And I will break with her and with her father,
    And thou shalt have her. Wast not to this end
    That thou began'st to twist so fine a story?
  Pedro. What need the bridge much broader than the flood?
    The fairest grant is the necessity.
    Look, what will serve is fit. 'Tis once, thou lovest,
    And I will fit thee with the remedy.
    I know we shall have revelling to-night.
    I will assume thy part in some disguise
    And tell fair Hero I am Claudio,
    And in her bosom I'll unclasp my heart
    And take her hearing prisoner with the force
    And strong encounter of my amorous tale.
    Then after to her father will I break,
    And the conclusion is, she shall be thine.
    In practice let us put it presently.                 Exeunt.
Scene II.
A room in Leonato's house.
Enter [at one door] Leonato and [at another door, Antonio] an old man,
brother to Leonato.
  Pedro. Lady, will you walk a bout with your friend?
  Pedro. With me in your company?  
  Pedro. And when please you to say so?
  Pedro. My visor is Philemon's roof; within the house is Jove.
  Pedro. Speak low if you speak love.         [Takes her aside.]
  Pedro. Now, signior, where's the Count? Did you see him?
  Pedro. To be whipt? What's his fault?
  Pedro. Wilt thou make a trust a transgression? The transgression is
    in the stealer.
  Pedro. I will but teach them to sing and restore them to the owner.
  Pedro. The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you. The gentleman that
    danc'd with her told her she is much wrong'd by you.
  Pedro. Look, here she comes.
  Pedro. None, but to desire your good company.
  Pedro. Come, lady, come; you have lost the heart of Signior
    Benedick.
  Pedro. You have put him down, lady; you have put him down.
  Pedro. Why, how now, Count? Wherefore are you sad?
  Pedro. How then? sick?  
  Pedro. I' faith, lady, I think your blazon to be true; though I'll
    be sworn, if he be so, his conceit is false. Here, Claudio, I
    have wooed in thy name, and fair Hero is won. I have broke with
    her father, and his good will obtained. Name the day of marriage,
    and God give thee joy!
  Pedro. In faith, lady, you have a merry heart.
  Pedro. Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.
  Pedro. Will you have me, lady?
  Pedro. Your silence most offends me, and to be merry best becomes
    you, for out o' question you were born in a merry hour.
  Pedro. By my troth, a pleasant-spirited lady.  
  Pedro. She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.
  Pedro. She were an excellent wife for Benedick.
  Pedro. County Claudio, when mean you to go to church?
  Pedro. Come, you shake the head at so long a breathing;
    but I warrant thee, Claudio, the time shall not go dully by us.
    I will in the interim undertake one of Hercules' labours, which
    is, to bring Signior Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a
    mountain of affection th' one with th' other. I would fain have  
    it a match, and I doubt not but to fashion it if you three will
    but minister such assistance as I shall give you direction.
  Pedro. And you too, gentle Hero?
  Pedro. And Benedick is not the unhopefullest husband that I know.
    Thus far can I praise him: he is of a noble strain, of approved
    valour, and confirm'd honesty. I will teach you how to humour
    your cousin, that she shall fall in love with Benedick; and I,
    [to Leonato and Claudio] with your two helps, will so practise on
    Benedick that, in despite of his quick wit and his queasy
    stomach, he shall fall in love with Beatrice. If we can do this,
    Cupid is no longer an archer; his glory shall be ours, for we are
    the only love-gods. Go in with me, and I will tell you my drift.
                                                         Exeunt.
Scene II.
A hall in Leonato's house.
Enter [Don] John and Borachio.
  Pedro. Come, shall we hear this music?
  Pedro. See you where Benedick hath hid himself?
  Pedro. Come, Balthasar, we'll hear that song again.
  Pedro. It is the witness still of excellency
    To put a strange face on his own perfection.
    I pray thee sing, and let me woo no more.
  Pedro. Nay, pray thee come;  
    Or if thou wilt hold longer argument,
    Do it in notes.
  Pedro. Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks!
    Note notes, forsooth, and nothing!                  [Music.]
  Pedro. By my troth, a good song.
  Pedro. Ha, no, no, faith! Thou sing'st well enough for a shift.
  Pedro. Yea, marry. Dost thou hear, Balthasar? I pray thee get us
    some excellent music; for to-morrow night we would have it at the
    Lady Hero's chamber window.
  Pedro. Do so. Farewell.  
                                Exit Balthasar [with Musicians].
    Come hither, Leonato. What was it you told me of to-day? that
    your niece Beatrice was in love with Signior Benedick?
  Pedro. May be she doth but counterfeit.
  Pedro. Why, what effects of passion shows she?
  Pedro. How, how, I pray you? You amaze me. I would have thought her
    spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection.
  Pedro. Hath she made her affection known to Benedick?
  Pedro. It were good that Benedick knew of it by some other, if she
    will not discover it.
  Pedro. An he should, it were an alms to hang him! She's an
    excellent sweet lady, and (out of all suspicion) she is virtuous.  
  Pedro. In everything but in loving Benedick.
  Pedro. I would she had bestowed this dotage on me. I would have
    daff'd all other respects and made her half myself. I pray you
    tell Benedick of it and hear what 'a will say.
  Pedro. She doth well. If she should make tender of her love, 'tis
    very possible he'll scorn it; for the man (as you know all) hath
    a contemptible spirit.
  Pedro. He hath indeed a good outward happiness.
  Pedro. He doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit.  
  Pedro. As Hector, I assure you; and in the managing of quarrels you
    may say he is wise, for either he avoids them with great
    discretion, or undertakes them with a most Christianlike fear.
  Pedro. And so will he do; for the man doth fear God, howsoever it
    seems not in him by some large jests he will make. Well, I am
    sorry for your niece. Shall we go seek Benedick and tell him of
    her love?
  Pedro. Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter. Let it
    cool the while. I love Benedick well, and I could wish he would
    modestly examine himself to see how much he is unworthy so good a
    lady.
  Pedro. Let there be the same net spread for her, and that must your
    daughter and her gentlewomen carry. The sport will be, when they
    hold one an opinion of another's dotage, and no such matter.
    That's the scene that I would see, which will be merely a dumb
    show. Let us send her to call him in to dinner.
                       Exeunt [Don Pedro, Claudio, and Leonato].
                [Benedick advances from the arbour.]
  Pedro. I do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and then go
    I toward Arragon.
  Pedro. Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your
    marriage as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear
    it. I will only be bold with Benedick for his company; for, from
    the crown of his head to the sole of his foot, he is all mirth.
    He hath twice or thrice cut Cupid's bowstring, and the little
    hangman dare not shoot at him. He hath a heart as sound as a
    bell; and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks,
    his tongue speaks.
  Pedro. Hang him, truant! There's no true drop of blood in him to be
    truly touch'd with love. If he be sad, he wants money.
  Pedro. Draw it.
  Pedro. What? sigh for the toothache?
  Pedro. There is no appearance of fancy in him, unless it be a fancy
    that he hath to strange disguises; as to be a Dutchman to-day, a
    Frenchman to-morrow; or in the shape of two countries at once, as
    a German from the waist downward, all slops, and a Spaniard from
    the hip upward, no doublet. Unless he have a fancy to this
    foolery, as it appears he hath, he is no fool for fancy, as you
    would have it appear he is.
  Pedro. Hath any man seen him at the barber's?
  Pedro. Nay, 'a rubs himself with civet. Can you smell him out by
    that?
  Pedro. The greatest note of it is his melancholy.
  Pedro. Yea, or to paint himself? for the which I hear what they say
    of him.
  Pedro. Indeed that tells a heavy tale for him. Conclude, conclude,
    he is in love.
  Pedro. That would I know too. I warrant, one that knows him not.
  Pedro. She shall be buried with her face upwards.
  Pedro. For my life, to break with him about Beatrice!
  Pedro. Good den, brother.
  Pedro. In private?
  Pedro. What's the matter?
  Pedro. You know he does.
  Pedro. Why, what's the matter?
  Pedro. I will not think it.
  Pedro. And, as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join with
    thee to disgrace her.
  Pedro. O day untowardly turned!
  Pedro. Nothing, unless you render her again.
  Pedro. What should I speak?
    I stand dishonour'd that have gone about
    To link my dear friend to a common stale.
  Pedro. Why, then are you no maiden. Leonato,
    I am sorry you must hear. Upon my honour,
    Myself, my brother, and this grieved Count
    Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night
    Talk with a ruffian at her chamber window,
    Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain,
    Confess'd the vile encounters they have had
    A thousand times in secret.
  Pedro. Good den, Good den.
  Pedro. We have some haste, Leonato.
  Pedro. Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.
  Pedro. You say not right, old man
  Pedro. Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience.
    My heart is sorry for your daughter's death;
    But, on my honour, she was charg'd with nothing
    But what was true, and very full of proof.  
  Pedro. I will not hear you.
  Pedro. See, see! Here comes the man we went to seek.
  Pedro. Welcome, signior. You are almost come to part almost a fray.
  Pedro. Leonato and his brother. What think'st thou? Had we fought,
    I doubt we should have been too young for them.
  Pedro. Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?
  Pedro. As I am an honest man, he looks pale. Art thou sick or
    angry?
  Pedro. By this light, he changes more and more. I think he be angry
    indeed.
  Pedro. What, a feast, a feast?
  Pedro. I'll tell thee how Beatrice prais'd thy wit the other day. I
    said thou hadst a fine wit: 'True,' said she, 'a fine little
    one.' 'No,' said I, 'a great wit.' 'Right,' says she, 'a great
    gross one.' 'Nay,' said I, 'a good wit.' 'Just,' said she, 'it
    hurts nobody.' 'Nay,' said I, 'the gentleman is wise.' 'Certain,'
    said she, a wise gentleman.' 'Nay,' said I, 'he hath the
    tongues.' 'That I believe' said she, 'for he swore a thing to me
    on Monday night which he forswore on Tuesday morning. There's a
    double tongue; there's two tongues.' Thus did she an hour
    together transshape thy particular virtues. Yet at last she
    concluded with a sigh, thou wast the proper'st man in Italy.  
  Pedro. Yea, that she did; but yet, for all that, an if she did not
    hate him deadly, she would love him dearly. The old man's
    daughter told us all.
  Pedro. But when shall we set the savage bull's horns on the
    sensible Benedick's head?
  Pedro. He is in earnest.
  Pedro. And hath challeng'd thee.
  Pedro. What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his doublet and
    hose and leaves off his wit!
  Enter Constables [Dogberry and Verges, with the Watch, leading]
                      Conrade and Borachio.
  Pedro. But, soft you, let me be! Pluck up, my heart, and be sad!
    Did he not say my brother was fled?
  Pedro. How now? two of my brother's men bound? Borachio one.
  Pedro. Officers, what offence have these men done?
  Pedro. First, I ask thee what they have done; thirdly, I ask thee
    what's their offence; sixth and lastly, why they are committed;
    and to conclude, what you lay to their charge.
  Pedro. Who have you offended, masters, that you are thus bound to
    your answer? This learned constable is too cunning to be
    understood. What's your offence?
  Pedro. Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?
  Pedro. But did my brother set thee on to this?
  Pedro. He is compos'd and fram'd of treachery,
    And fled he is upon this villany.
  Pedro. By my soul, nor I!
    And yet, to satisfy this good old man,
    I would bend under any heavy weight  
    That he'll enjoin me to.
  Pedro. We will not fall.
  Pedro. Good morrow, masters. Put your torches out.
    The wolves have prey'd, and look, the gentle day,
    Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about  
    Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey.
    Thanks to you all, and leave us. Fare you well.
  Pedro. Come, let us hence and put on other weeds,
    And then to Leonato's we will go.
  Pedro. Good morrow to this fair assembly.
  Pedro. Good morrow, Benedick. Why, what's the matter
    That you have such a February face,
    So full of frost, of storm, and cloudiness?
  Pedro. The former Hero! Hero that is dead!  
