  BIONDELLO. Where have I been! Nay, how now! where are you?
    Master, has my fellow Tranio stol'n your clothes?
    Or you stol'n his? or both? Pray, what's the news?
  BIONDELLO. I, sir? Ne'er a whit.
  BIONDELLO. The better for him; would I were so too!
  BIONDELLO. He that has the two fair daughters; is't he you mean?
  BIONDELLO. Why, is it not news to hear of Petruchio's coming?  
  BIONDELLO. Why, no, sir.
  BIONDELLO. He is coming.
  BIONDELLO. When he stands where I am and sees you there.
  BIONDELLO. Why, Petruchio is coming- in a new hat and an old
    jerkin; a pair of old breeches thrice turn'd; a pair of boots
    that have been candle-cases, one buckled, another lac'd; an old
    rusty sword ta'en out of the town armoury, with a broken hilt,
    and chapeless; with two broken points; his horse hipp'd, with an
    old motley saddle and stirrups of no kindred; besides, possess'd
    with the glanders and like to mose in the chine, troubled with
    the lampass, infected with the fashions, full of windgalls, sped
    with spavins, rayed with the yellows, past cure of the fives,
    stark spoil'd with the staggers, begnawn with the bots, sway'd in
    the back and shoulder-shotten, near-legg'd before, and with a
    half-cheek'd bit, and a head-stall of sheep's leather which,
    being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been often  
    burst, and now repaired with knots; one girth six times piec'd,
    and a woman's crupper of velure, which hath two letters for her
    name fairly set down in studs, and here and there piec'd with
    pack-thread.
  BIONDELLO. O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparison'd like
    the horse- with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hose
    on the other, gart'red with a red and blue list; an old hat, and
    the humour of forty fancies prick'd in't for a feather; a
    monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian
    footboy or a gentleman's lackey.
  BIONDELLO. Why, sir, he comes not.
  BIONDELLO. Who? that Petruchio came?
  BIONDELLO. No, sir; I say his horse comes with him on his back.
  BIONDELLO. Nay, by Saint Jamy,
             I hold you a penny,
             A horse and a man
             Is more than one,
             And yet not many.
                  Enter PETRUCHIO and GRUMIO
  BIONDELLO. O master, master, have watch'd so long
    That I am dog-weary; but at last I spied
    An ancient angel coming down the hill
    Will serve the turn.
  BIONDELLO. Master, a mercatante or a pedant,
    I know not what; but formal in apparel,
    In gait and countenance surely like a father.
  BIONDELLO.  [Aside]  As much as an apple doth an oyster, and all
    one.
  BIONDELLO. Tut, fear not me.  
  BIONDELLO. I told him that your father was at Venice,
    And that you look'd for him this day in Padua.
  BIONDELLO. I pray the gods she may, with all my heart.
  BIONDELLO. Cambio.
  BIONDELLO. You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
  BIONDELLO. Faith, nothing; but has left me here behind to expound
    the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.
  BIONDELLO. Then thus: Baptista is safe, talking with the deceiving
    father of a deceitful son.
  BIONDELLO. His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
  BIONDELLO. The old priest at Saint Luke's church is at your command
    at all hours.  
  BIONDELLO. I cannot tell, except they are busied about a
    counterfeit assurance. Take your assurance of her, cum privilegio
    ad imprimendum solum; to th' church take the priest, clerk, and
    some sufficient honest witnesses.
    If this be not that you look for, I have more to say,
    But bid Bianca farewell for ever and a day.
  BIONDELLO. I cannot tarry. I knew a wench married in an afternoon
    as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit; and so
    may you, sir; and so adieu, sir. My master hath appointed me to
    go to Saint Luke's to bid the priest be ready to come against you
    come with your appendix.
 Exit
  BIONDELLO. Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
  BIONDELLO. Nay, faith, I'll see the church a your back, and then
    come back to my master's as soon as I can.
                          Exeunt LUCENTIO, BIANCA, and BIONDELLO
  BIONDELLO. I have seen them in the church together. God send 'em
    good shipping! But who is here? Mine old master, Vicentio! Now we
    are undone and brought to nothing.
  BIONDELLO. I hope I may choose, sir.
  BIONDELLO. Forgot you! No, sir. I could not forget you, for I never
    saw you before in all my life.
  BIONDELLO. What, my old worshipful old master? Yes, marry, sir; see
    where he looks out of the window.
  BIONDELLO. Help, help, help! Here's a madman will murder me.
 Exit  
  BIONDELLO. O, we are spoil'd; and yonder he is! Deny him, forswear
    him, or else we are all undone.
         Exeunt BIONDELLO, TRANIO, and PEDANT, as fast as may be
  BIONDELLO. I go.                                          Exit
  BIONDELLO. Sir, my mistress sends you word
    That she is busy and she cannot come.
  BIONDELLO. She says you have some goodly jest in hand:
    She will not come; she bids you come to her.
