  GRUMIO. Knock you here, sir? Why, sir, what am I, sir, that I
    should knock you here, sir?
  GRUMIO. My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock you first,
    And then I know after who comes by the worst.
  GRUMIO. Help, masters, help! My master is mad.
  GRUMIO. Nay, 'tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in Latin. If this
    be not a lawful cause for me to leave his service- look you, sir:
    he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, sir. Well, was it fit
    for a servant to use his master so; being, perhaps, for aught I
    see, two and thirty, a pip out?
    Whom would to God I had well knock'd at first,
    Then had not Grumio come by the worst.
  GRUMIO. Knock at the gate? O heavens! Spake you not these words
    plain: 'Sirrah knock me here, rap me here, knock me well, and
    knock me soundly'? And come you now with 'knocking at the gate'?
  GRUMIO. Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his mind is.
    Why, give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an  
    aglet-baby, or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head, though
    she has as many diseases as two and fifty horses. Why, nothing
    comes amiss, so money comes withal.
  GRUMIO. I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts. O' my
    word, and she knew him as well as I do, she would think scolding
    would do little good upon him. She may perhaps call him half a
    score knaves or so. Why, that's nothing; and he begin once, he'll
    rail in his rope-tricks. I'll tell you what, sir: an she stand
    him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face, and so
    disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see
    withal than a cat. You know him not, sir.
  GRUMIO. Katherine the curst!
    A title for a maid of all titles the worst.
  GRUMIO. Here's no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks, how the  
    young folks lay their heads together! Master, master, look about
    you. Who goes there, ha?
  GRUMIO. A proper stripling, and an amorous!
                                              [They stand aside]
  GRUMIO. O this woodcock, what an ass it is!
  GRUMIO. And that his bags shall prove.
  GRUMIO. Will he woo her? Ay, or I'll hang her.
  GRUMIO. For he fears none.
  GRUMIO. I would I were as sure of a good dinner.
    Enter TRANIO, bravely apparelled as LUCENTIO, and BIONDELLO
  GRUMIO. Ay, sir, they be ready; the oats have eaten the horses.
  GRUMIO. Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and all
    foul ways! Was ever man so beaten? Was ever man so ray'd? Was
    ever man so weary? I am sent before to make a fire, and they are
    coming after to warm them. Now were not I a little pot and soon
    hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roof
    of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere I should come by a fire to
    thaw me. But I with blowing the fire shall warm myself; for,
    considering the weather, a taller man than I will take cold.
    Holla, ho! Curtis!
                            Enter CURTIS
  GRUMIO. A piece of ice. If thou doubt it, thou mayst slide from my
    shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my
    neck. A fire, good Curtis.
  GRUMIO. O, ay, Curtis, ay; and therefore fire, fire; cast on no
    water.
  GRUMIO. She was, good Curtis, before this frost; but thou know'st
    winter tames man, woman, and beast; for it hath tam'd my old
    master, and my new mistress, and myself, fellow Curtis.
  GRUMIO. Am I but three inches? Why, thy horn is a foot, and so long
    am I at the least. But wilt thou make a fire, or shall I complain
    on thee to our mistress, whose hand- she being now at hand- thou
    shalt soon feel, to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy hot
    office?
  GRUMIO. A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine; and
    therefore fire. Do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my master and
    mistress are almost frozen to death.
  GRUMIO. Why, 'Jack boy! ho, boy!' and as much news as thou wilt.
  GRUMIO. Why, therefore, fire; for I have caught extreme cold.  
    Where's the cook? Is supper ready, the house trimm'd, rushes
    strew'd, cobwebs swept, the serving-men in their new fustian,
    their white stockings, and every officer his wedding-garment on?
    Be the jacks fair within, the jills fair without, the carpets
    laid, and everything in order?
  GRUMIO. First know my horse is tired; my master and mistress fall'n
    out.
  GRUMIO. Out of their saddles into the dirt; and thereby hangs a
    tale.
  GRUMIO. Lend thine ear.
  GRUMIO. There.                                  [Striking him]
  GRUMIO. And therefore 'tis call'd a sensible tale; and this cuff
    was but to knock at your car and beseech list'ning. Now I begin:
    Imprimis, we came down a foul hill, my master riding behind my
    mistress-  
  GRUMIO. What's that to thee?
  GRUMIO. Tell thou the tale. But hadst thou not cross'd me, thou
    shouldst have heard how her horse fell and she under her horse;
    thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place, how she was
    bemoil'd, how he left her with the horse upon her, how he beat me
    because her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt to
    pluck him off me, how he swore, how she pray'd that never pray'd
    before, how I cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle was
    burst, how I lost my crupper- with many things of worthy memory,
    which now shall die in oblivion, and thou return unexperienc'd to
    thy grave.
  GRUMIO. Ay, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find
    when he comes home. But what talk I of this? Call forth
    Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and the
    rest; let their heads be sleekly comb'd, their blue coats brush'd
    and their garters of an indifferent knit; let them curtsy with
    their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my mastcr's  
    horse-tail till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready?
  GRUMIO. Call them forth.
  GRUMIO. Why, she hath a face of her own.
  GRUMIO. Thou, it seems, that calls for company to countenance her.
  GRUMIO. Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.
                     Enter four or five SERVINGMEN
  GRUMIO. Welcome, you!- how now, you!- what, you!- fellow, you!- and
    thus much for greeting. Now, my spruce companions, is all ready,  
    and all things neat?
  GRUMIO. E'en at hand, alighted by this; and therefore be not-
   Cock's passion, silence! I hear my master.
                     Enter PETRUCHIO and KATHERINA
  GRUMIO. Here, sir; as foolish as I was before.
  GRUMIO. Nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,  
    And Gabriel's pumps were all unpink'd i' th' heel;
    There was no link to colour Peter's hat,
    And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing;
    There were none fine but Adam, Ralph, and Gregory;
    The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly;
    Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.
  GRUMIO. Where is he?
  GRUMIO. No, no, forsooth; I dare not for my life.
  GRUMIO. What say you to a neat's foot?  
  GRUMIO. I fear it is too choleric a meat.
    How say you to a fat tripe finely broil'd?
  GRUMIO. I cannot tell; I fear 'tis choleric.
    What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
  GRUMIO. Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
  GRUMIO. Nay, then I will not; you shall have the mustard,
    Or else you get no beef of Grumio.
  GRUMIO. Why then the mustard without the beef.
  GRUMIO. I gave him no order; I gave him the stuff.
  GRUMIO. Marry, sir, with needle and thread.
  GRUMIO. Thou hast fac'd many things.
  GRUMIO. Face not me. Thou hast brav'd many men; brave not me. I
    will neither be fac'd nor brav'd. I say unto thee, I bid thy
    master cut out the gown; but I did not bid him cut it to pieces.
    Ergo, thou liest.
  GRUMIO. The note lies in's throat, if he say I said so.
  GRUMIO. Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in the
    skirts of it and beat me to death with a bottom of brown bread; I
    said a gown.
  GRUMIO. I confess the cape.
  GRUMIO. I confess two sleeves.
  GRUMIO. Error i' th' bill, sir; error i' th' bill! I commanded the
    sleeves should be cut out, and sew'd up again; and that I'll  
    prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.
  GRUMIO. I am for thee straight; take thou the bill, give me thy
    meteyard, and spare not me.
  GRUMIO. You are i' th' right, sir; 'tis for my mistress.
  GRUMIO. Villain, not for thy life! Take up my mistress' gown for
    thy master's use!
  GRUMIO. O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for.
    Take up my mistress' gown to his master's use!
    O fie, fie, fie!
