  BRUTUS. He has no equal.
  BRUTUS. Mark'd you his lip and eyes?
  BRUTUS. Being mov'd, he will not spare to gird the gods.
  BRUTUS. The present wars devour him! He is grown
    Too proud to be so valiant.
  BRUTUS. Fame, at the which he aims-
    In whom already he is well grac'd- cannot
    Better be held nor more attain'd than by
    A place below the first; for what miscarries
    Shall be the general's fault, though he perform
    To th' utmost of a man, and giddy censure
    Will then cry out of Marcius 'O, if he
    Had borne the business!'
  BRUTUS. Come.
    Half all Cominius' honours are to Marcius,
    Though Marcius earn'd them not; and all his faults
    To Marcius shall be honours, though indeed
    In aught he merit not.
  BRUTUS. Let's along.                                    Exeunt
SCENE II.
Corioli. The Senate House.
Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS with SENATORS of Corioli
  BRUTUS. Good or bad?
  BRUTUS. He's a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear.
  BRUTUS. He's poor in no one fault, but stor'd with all.  
  BRUTUS. And topping all others in boasting.
  BRUTUS. We do it not alone, sir.
  BRUTUS. Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.  
  BRUTUS. Come, come, you are well understood to be a perfecter giber
    for the table than a necessary bencher in the Capitol.
  BRUTUS. All tongues speak of him and the bleared sights
    Are spectacled to see him. Your prattling nurse
    Into a rapture lets her baby cry
    While she chats him; the kitchen malkin pins
    Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck,
    Clamb'ring the walls to eye him; stalls, bulks, windows,
    Are smother'd up, leads fill'd and ridges hors'd
    With variable complexions, all agreeing
    In earnestness to see him. Seld-shown flamens
    Do press among the popular throngs and puff
    To win a vulgar station; our veil'd dames  
    Commit the war of white and damask in
    Their nicely gawded cheeks to th' wanton spoil
    Of Phoebus' burning kisses. Such a pother,
    As if that whatsoever god who leads him
    Were slily crept into his human powers,
    And gave him graceful posture.
  BRUTUS. Then our office may
    During his power go sleep.
  BRUTUS. In that there's comfort.
  BRUTUS. I heard him swear,
    Were he to stand for consul, never would he
    Appear i' th' market-place, nor on him put
    The napless vesture of humility;
    Nor, showing, as the manner is, his wounds
    To th' people, beg their stinking breaths.
  BRUTUS. It was his word. O, he would miss it rather
    Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him
    And the desire of the nobles.
  BRUTUS. 'Tis most like he will.
  BRUTUS. So it must fall out
    To him or our authorities. For an end,
    We must suggest the people in what hatred
    He still hath held them; that to's power he would  
    Have made them mules, silenc'd their pleaders, and
    Dispropertied their freedoms; holding them
    In human action and capacity
    Of no more soul nor fitness for the world
    Than camels in their war, who have their provand
    Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows
    For sinking under them.
  BRUTUS. What's the matter?
  BRUTUS. Let's to the Capitol,
    And carry with us ears and eyes for th' time,
    But hearts for the event.
  BRUTUS. Which the rather
    We shall be bless'd to do, if he remember
    A kinder value of the people than
    He hath hereto priz'd them at.
  BRUTUS. Most willingly.
    But yet my caution was more pertinent
    Than the rebuke you give it.
  BRUTUS. Sir, I hope
    My words disbench'd you not.
  BRUTUS. Mark you that?  
  BRUTUS. You see how he intends to use the people.
  BRUTUS. Come, we'll inform them
    Of our proceedings here. On th' market-place
    I know they do attend us.                             Exeunt
SCENE III.
Rome. The Forum
Enter seven or eight citizens
  BRUTUS. We stay here for the people.
  BRUTUS. With a proud heart he wore
    His humble weeds. Will you dismiss the people?
                            Re-enter citizens
  BRUTUS. We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.
  BRUTUS. Could you not have told him-
    As you were lesson'd- when he had no power
    But was a petty servant to the state,
    He was your enemy; ever spake against
    Your liberties and the charters that you bear
    I' th' body of the weal; and now, arriving
    A place of potency and sway o' th' state,
    If he should still malignantly remain
    Fast foe to th' plebeii, your voices might
    Be curses to yourselves? You should have said
    That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
    Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature
    Would think upon you for your voices, and
    Translate his malice towards you into love,
    Standing your friendly lord.
  BRUTUS. Did you perceive
    He did solicit you in free contempt
    When he did need your loves; and do you think
    That his contempt shall not be bruising to you
    When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies
    No heart among you? Or had you tongues to cry
    Against the rectorship of judgment?
  BRUTUS. Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends
    They have chose a consul that will from them take
    Their liberties, make them of no more voice
    Than dogs, that are as often beat for barking
    As therefore kept to do so.
  BRUTUS. Lay
    A fault on us, your tribunes, that we labour'd,
    No impediment between, but that you must  
    Cast your election on him.
  BRUTUS. Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you,
    How youngly he began to serve his country,
    How long continued; and what stock he springs of-
    The noble house o' th' Marcians; from whence came
    That Ancus Marcius, Numa's daughter's son,
    Who, after great Hostilius, here was king;
    Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
    That our best water brought by conduits hither;
    And Censorinus, nobly named so,
    Twice being by the people chosen censor,
    Was his great ancestor.
  BRUTUS. Say you ne'er had done't-
    Harp on that still- but by our putting on;
    And presently, when you have drawn your number,
    Repair to th' Capitol.
  BRUTUS. Let them go on;
    This mutiny were better put in hazard
    Than stay, past doubt, for greater.
    If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
    With their refusal, both observe and answer
    The vantage of his anger.
  BRUTUS. It will be dangerous to go on- no further.
  BRUTUS. Cominius, no.
  BRUTUS. The people are incens'd against him.
  BRUTUS. Call't not a plot.
    The people cry you mock'd them; and of late,  
    When corn was given them gratis, you repin'd;
    Scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them
    Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.
  BRUTUS. Not to them all.
  BRUTUS. How? I inform them!
  BRUTUS. Not unlike
    Each way to better yours.
  BRUTUS. You speak o' th' people
    As if you were a god, to punish; not
    A man of their infirmity.
  BRUTUS. Why shall the people give
    One that speaks thus their voice?
  BRUTUS. Enough, with over measure.
  BRUTUS. Has said enough.
  BRUTUS. Manifest treason!
  BRUTUS. The aediles, ho!
                           Enter an AEDILE
    Let him be apprehended.
  BRUTUS. Seize him, aediles.
    PLEBEIANS. Down with him! down with him!
  BRUTUS. By the consent of all we were establish'd
    The people's magistrates.
  BRUTUS. Or let us stand to our authority
    Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce,
    Upon the part o' th' people, in whose power
    We were elected theirs: Marcius is worthy
    Of present death.
  BRUTUS. AEdiles, seize him.
  BRUTUS. Sir, those cold ways,
    That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous
    Where the disease is violent. Lay hands upon him
    And bear him to the rock.
                                    [CORIOLANUS draws his sword]
  BRUTUS. Lay hands upon him.
  BRUTUS. He consul!
  BRUTUS. Merely awry. When he did love his country,
    It honour'd him.
  BRUTUS. We'll hear no more.
    Pursue him to his house and pluck him thence,
    Lest his infection, being of catching nature,
    Spread further.
  BRUTUS. If it were so-
  BRUTUS. Go not home.
  BRUTUS. In this point charge him home, that he affects
    Tyrannical power. If he evade us there,
    Enforce him with his envy to the people,
    And that the spoil got on the Antiates
    Was ne'er distributed.
                           Enter an AEDILE
    What, will he come?
  BRUTUS. How accompanied?
  BRUTUS. And when such time they have begun to cry,
    Let them not cease, but with a din confus'd
    Enforce the present execution
    Of what we chance to sentence.
  BRUTUS. Go about it.                               Exit AEDILE
    Put him to choler straight. He hath been us'd
    Ever to conquer, and to have his worth  
    Of contradiction; being once chaf'd, he cannot
    Be rein'd again to temperance; then he speaks
    What's in his heart, and that is there which looks
    With us to break his neck.
          Enter CORIOLANUS, MENENIUS and COMINIUS, with others
  BRUTUS. But since he hath
    Serv'd well for Rome-
  BRUTUS. I talk of that that know it.
  BRUTUS. There's no more to be said, but he is banish'd,
    As enemy to the people and his country.
    It shall be so.
  BRUTUS. Now we have shown our power,
    Let us seem humbler after it is done
    Than when it was a-doing.
  BRUTUS. Dismiss them home.                         Exit AEDILE
    Here comes his mother.
                   Enter VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, and MENENIUS
  BRUTUS. Why?  
  BRUTUS. They have ta'en note of us; keep on your way.
  BRUTUS. I would he had.
  BRUTUS. Pray, let's go.
  BRUTUS. Well, well, we'll leave you.
  BRUTUS. We stood to't in good time. Is this Menenius?
  BRUTUS. God-den to you all, god-den to you an.
  BRUTUS. Farewell, kind neighbours; we wish'd Coriolanus
    Had lov'd you as we did.
  BRUTUS. Caius Marcius was
    A worthy officer i' the war, but insolent,
    O'ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking,
    Self-loving-
  BRUTUS. The gods have well prevented it, and Rome
    Sits safe and still without him.
                             Enter an AEDILE
  BRUTUS. Go see this rumourer whipp'd. It cannot be
    The Volsces dare break with us.
  BRUTUS. Not Possible.
                           Enter A MESSENGER
  BRUTUS. Rais'd only that the weaker sort may wish
    Good Marcius home again.
  BRUTUS. But is this true, sir?
  BRUTUS. I do not like this news.
  BRUTUS. Let's to the Capitol. Would half my wealth
    Would buy this for a lie!
  BRUTUS. Only make trial what your love can do
    For Rome, towards Marcius.
  BRUTUS. You know the very road into his kindness
    And cannot lose your way.
