ANGELO. Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome; we would fain have either.
ANGELO. I'll meet you at that place some hour hence.
ANGELO. Master Antipholus!
ANGELO. I know it well, sir. Lo, here is the chain.
  I thought to have ta'en you at the Porpentine;
  The chain unfinish'd made me stay thus long.
ANGELO. What please yourself, sir; I have made it for you.
ANGELO. Not once nor twice, but twenty times you have.
  Go home with it, and please your wife withal;
  And soon at supper-time I'll visit you,
  And then receive my money for the chain.
ANGELO. You are a merry man, sir; fare you well.
<Exit
ANGELO. Even just the sum that I do owe to you
  Is growing to me by Antipholus;
  And in the instant that I met with you
  He had of me a chain; at five o'clock
  I shall receive the money for the same.
  Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house,
  I will discharge my bond, and thank you too.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS, and DROMIO OF EPHESUS, from the COURTESAN'S
ANGELO. Saving your merry humour, here's the note
  How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
  The fineness of the gold, and chargeful fashion,
  Which doth amount to three odd ducats more
  Than I stand debted to this gentleman.
  I pray you see him presently discharg'd,
  For he is bound to sea, and stays but for it.
ANGELO. Then you will bring the chain to her yourself?
ANGELO. Well, sir, I will. Have you the chain about you?
ANGELO. Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain;
  Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,
  And I, to blame, have held him here too long.
ANGELO. You hear how he importunes me-the chain!
ANGELO. Come, come, you know I gave it you even now.
  Either send the chain or send by me some token.
ANGELO. The money that you owe me for the chain.
ANGELO. You know I gave it you half an hour since.
ANGELO. You wrong me more, sir, in denying it.
  Consider how it stands upon my credit.
ANGELO. This touches me in reputation.
  Either consent to pay this sum for me,
  Or I attach you by this officer.
ANGELO. Here is thy fee; arrest him, officer.
  I would not spare my brother in this case,
  If he should scorn me so apparently.
ANGELO. Sir, sir, I shall have law in Ephesus,
  To your notorious shame, I doubt it not.
Enter DROMIO OF SYRACUSE, from the bay
ANGELO. I am sorry, sir, that I have hind'red you;
  But I protest he had the chain of me,
  Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.
ANGELO. Of very reverend reputation, sir,
  Of credit infinite, highly belov'd,
  Second to none that lives here in the city;
  His word might bear my wealth at any time.
ANGELO. 'Tis so; and that self chain about his neck
  Which he forswore most monstrously to have.
  Good sir, draw near to me, I'll speak to him.
  Signior Andpholus, I wonder much
  That you would put me to this shame and trouble;
  And, not without some scandal to yourself,
  With circumstance and oaths so to deny
  This chain, which now you wear so openly.
  Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
  You have done wrong to this my honest friend;
  Who, but for staying on our controversy,
  Had hoisted sail and put to sea to-day.
  This chain you had of me; can you deny it?
ANGELO. I knew he was not in his perfect wits.
ANGELO. Upon what cause?
ANGELO. See where they come; we will behold his death.
ANGELO. O peflur'd woman! They are both forsworn.
  In this the madman justly chargeth them.
ANGELO. My lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him,
  That he din'd not at home, but was lock'd out.
ANGELO. He had, my lord, and when he ran in here,
  These people saw the chain about his neck.
ANGELO. That is the chain, sir, which you had of me.
ANGELO. I think I did, sir; I deny it not.
