  DUKE. There is no composition in these news
    That gives them credit.
  DUKE. And mine, a hundred and forty.
  DUKE. Nay, it is possible enough to judgement.
    I do not so secure me in the error,
    But the main article I do approve
    In fearful sense.
  DUKE.                                Now, what's the business?
  DUKE. How say you by this change?
  DUKE. Nay, in all confidence, he's not for Rhodes.  
  DUKE. 'Tis certain then for Cyprus.
    Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?
  DUKE. Write from us to him, post-post-haste dispatch.
  DUKE. Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you
    Against the general enemy Ottoman.
    [To Brabantio.] I did not see you; welcome, gentle signior;
    We lack'd your counsel and your help tonight.
  DUKE.                     Why, what's the matter?
  DUKE. Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding
    Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself
    And you of her, the bloody book of law
    You shall yourself read in the bitter letter
    After your own sense, yea, though our proper son
    Stood in your action.
  DUKE. [To Othello.] What in your own part can you say to this?
  DUKE.                  To vouch this is no proof,
    Without more certain and more overt test
    Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods
    Of modern seeming do prefer against him.
  DUKE.                     Fetch Desdemona hither.
  DUKE. Say it, Othello.
  DUKE. I think this tale would win my daughter too.
    Good Brabantio,  
    Take up this mangled matter at the best:
    Men do their broken weapons rather use
    Than their bare hands.
  DUKE. Let me speak like yourself, and lay a sentence
    Which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers
    Into your favor.
    When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
    By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
    To mourn a mischief that is past and gone
    Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
    What cannot be preserved when Fortune takes,
    Patience her injury a mockery makes.
    The robb'd that smiles steals something from the thief;
    He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.  
  DUKE. The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus.
    Othello, the fortitude of the place is best known to you; and
    though we have there a substitute of most allowed sufficiency,
    yet opinion, a sovereign mistress of effects, throws a more safer
    voice on you. You must therefore be content to slubber the gloss
    of your new fortunes with this more stubborn and boisterous
    expedition.
  DUKE.                          If you please,
    Be't at her father's.
  DUKE. What would you, Desdemona?  
  DUKE. Be it as you shall privately determine,
    Either for her stay or going. The affair cries haste,
    And speed must answer't: you must hence tonight.
  DUKE.                        This night.
  DUKE. At nine i' the morning here we'll meet again.
    Othello, leave some officer behind,
    And he shall our commission bring to you,
    With such things else of quality and respect
    As doth import you.
  DUKE.                  Let it be so.
    Good night to everyone. [To Brabantio.] And, noble signior,
    If virtue no delighted beauty lack,
    Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.
