  PAINTER. I am glad y'are well.
  PAINTER. It wears, sir, as it grows.
  PAINTER. I know them both; th' other's a jeweller.
  PAINTER. You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedication
    To the great lord.
  PAINTER. A picture, sir. When comes your book forth?
  PAINTER. 'Tis a good piece.
  PAINTER. Indifferent.
  PAINTER. It is a pretty mocking of the life.
    Here is a touch; is't good?
  PAINTER. How this lord is followed!
  PAINTER. Look, moe!
  PAINTER. How shall I understand you?
  PAINTER. I saw them speak together.  
  PAINTER. 'Tis conceiv'd to scope.
    This throne, this Fortune, and this hill, methinks,
    With one man beckon'd from the rest below,
    Bowing his head against the steepy mount
    To climb his happiness, would be well express'd
    In our condition.
  PAINTER. Ay, marry, what of these?
  PAINTER. 'Tis common.
    A thousand moral paintings I can show
    That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortune's
    More pregnantly than words. Yet you do well
    To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen
    The foot above the head.
         Trumpets sound. Enter TIMON, addressing himself
          courteously to every suitor, a MESSENGER from
         VENTIDIUS talking with him; LUCILIUS and other
                       servants following  
  PAINTER. A piece of painting, which I do beseech
    Your lordship to accept.
  PAINTER. The gods preserve ye!
  PAINTER. Y'are a dog.
  PAINTER. As I took note of the place, it cannot be far where he
    abides.
  PAINTER. Certain. Alcibiades reports it; Phrynia and Timandra had
    gold of him. He likewise enrich'd poor straggling soldiers with
    great quantity. 'Tis said he gave unto his steward a mighty sum.
  PAINTER. Nothing else. You shall see him a palm in Athens again,
    and flourish with the highest. Therefore 'tis not amiss we tender
    our loves to him in this suppos'd distress of his; it will show
    honestly in us, and is very likely to load our purposes with what
    they travail for, if it be just and true report that goes of his
    having.
  PAINTER. Nothing at this time but my visitation; only I will
    promise him an excellent piece.  
  PAINTER. Good as the best. Promising is the very air o' th' time;
    it opens the eyes of expectation. Performance is ever the duller
    for his act, and but in the plainer and simpler kind of people
    the deed of saying is quite out of use. To promise is most
    courtly and fashionable; performance is a kind of will or
    testament which argues a great sickness in his judgment that
    makes it.
                    Enter TIMON from his cave
  PAINTER. True;
    When the day serves, before black-corner'd night,
    Find what thou want'st by free and offer'd light.
    Come.
  PAINTER. Our late noble master!
  PAINTER. He and myself
    Have travail'd in the great show'r of your gifts,
    And sweetly felt it.
  PAINTER. We are hither come to offer you our service.
  PAINTER. So it is said, my noble lord; but therefore
    Came not my friend nor I.
  PAINTER. So, so, my lord.
  PAINTER. I know not such, my lord.
