  Ben. Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.]
    Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
                          Enter Tybalt.
  Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
    Or manage it to part these men with me.
  Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary
    And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
    I drew to part them. In the instant came
    The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;
    Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,
    He swung about his head and cut the winds,
    Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.
    While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
    Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
    Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
  M. Wife. O, where is Romeo? Saw you him to-day?
    Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
  Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
    Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
    A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
    Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
    That westward rooteth from the city's side,  
    So early walking did I see your son.
    Towards him I made; but he was ware of me
    And stole into the covert of the wood.
    I- measuring his affections by my own,
    Which then most sought where most might not be found,
    Being one too many by my weary self-
    Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
    And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
  Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
    Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
    A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
    Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
    That westward rooteth from the city's side,  
    So early walking did I see your son.
    Towards him I made; but he was ware of me
    And stole into the covert of the wood.
    I- measuring his affections by my own,
    Which then most sought where most might not be found,
    Being one too many by my weary self-
    Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
    And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
  Ben. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
  Ben. Have you importun'd him by any means?
  Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,
    I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
  Ben. Good morrow, cousin.
  Ben. But new struck nine.
  Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
  Ben. In love?
  Ben. Of love?
  Ben. Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
    Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
  Ben. No, coz, I rather weep.
  Ben. At thy good heart's oppression.
  Ben. Soft! I will go along.
    An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
  Ben. Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
  Ben. Groan? Why, no;
    But sadly tell me who.
  Ben. I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.
  Ben. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
  Ben. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
  Ben. Be rul'd by me: forget to think of her.
  Ben. By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
    Examine other beauties.
  Ben. I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.      Exeunt.
Scene II.
A Street.
Enter Capulet, County Paris, and [Servant] -the Clown.
  Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
    One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;
    Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
    One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
    Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
    And the rank poison of the old will die.
  Ben. For what, I pray thee?
  Ben. Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
  Ben. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
    Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
    With all the admired beauties of Verona.
    Go thither, and with unattainted eye
    Compare her face with some that I shall show,
    And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
  Ben. Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by,
    Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;
    But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
    Your lady's love against some other maid
    That I will show you shining at this feast,
    And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
  Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.
    We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
    Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
    Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
    Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
    After the prompter, for our entrance;
    But, let them measure us by what they will,
    We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
  Ben. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
    But every man betake him to his legs.
  Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
    Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
  Ben. Strike, drum.
                           They march about the stage. [Exeunt.]
Scene V.
Capulet's house.
Servingmen come forth with napkins.
  1. Serv. Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
    He shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher!
  2. Serv. When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands,
    and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.
  1. Serv. Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert, look
    to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane and, as
    thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
    Anthony, and Potpan!
  2. Serv. Ay, boy, ready.
  1. Serv. You are look'd for and call'd for, ask'd for and sought
    for, in the great chamber.
  3. Serv. We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys!
    Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.      Exeunt.
    Enter the Maskers, Enter, [with Servants,] Capulet, his Wife,
              Juliet, Tybalt, and all the Guests
               and Gentlewomen to the Maskers.  
  Ben. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
  Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
  Ben. He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.
    Call, good Mercutio.
  Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
  Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
    To be consorted with the humorous night.  
    Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
  Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain
    'To seek him here that means not to be found.
                                                         Exeunt.
Scene II.
Capulet's orchard.
Enter Romeo.
  Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
  Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
    Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
  Ben. Romeo will answer it.
  Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being
    dared.
  Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?  
  Ben. The what?
  Ben. Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!
  Ben. Stop there, stop there!
  Ben. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
  Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.
  Ben. She will endite him to some supper.
  Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
    The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.
    And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
    For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
  Ben. Am I like such a fellow?
  Ben. And what to?
  Ben. An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy
    the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
  Ben. By my head, here come the Capulets.
  Ben. We talk here in the public haunt of men.
    Either withdraw unto some private place
    And reason coldly of your grievances,
    Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
  Ben. What, art thou hurt?
  Ben. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
    That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
    Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
  Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
  Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!
    The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
    Stand not amaz'd. The Prince will doom thee death
    If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
  Ben. Why dost thou stay?
                                                     Exit Romeo.
                      Enter Citizens.
  Ben. There lies that Tybalt.
  Ben. O noble Prince. I can discover all
    The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
    There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
    That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
  Ben. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did stay.
    Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
    How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
    Your high displeasure. All this- uttered
    With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd-  
    Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
    Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
    With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;
    Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
    And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
    Cold death aside and with the other sends
    It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
    Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
    'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and swifter than his tongue,
    His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
    And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
    An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
    Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
    But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,
    Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
    And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I
    Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;
    And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
    This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
