  LENNOX. What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look  
    That seems to speak things strange.
  LENNOX. Good morrow, noble sir.
  LENNOX. Goes the King hence today?  
  LENNOX. The night has been unruly. Where we lay,
    Our chimneys were blown down, and, as they say,
    Lamentings heard i' the air, strange screams of death,
    And prophesying with accents terrible
    Of dire combustion and confused events
    New hatch'd to the woeful time. The obscure bird
    Clamor'd the livelong night. Some say the earth
    Was feverous and did shake.
  LENNOX. My young remembrance cannot parallel
    A fellow to it.
                      Re-enter Macduff.
  LENNOX. Mean you his Majesty?
  LENNOX. Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done't.
    Their hands and faces were all badged with blood;
    So were their daggers, which unwiped we found
    Upon their pillows.
    They stared, and were distracted; no man's life
    Was to be trusted with them.  
  LENNOX. May't please your Highness sit.
      The Ghost of Banquo enters and sits in Macbeth's place.
  LENNOX. Here is a place reserved, sir.
  LENNOX. Here, my good lord. What is't that moves your Highness?
  LENNOX. Good night, and better health
    Attend his Majesty!
  LENNOX. My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,
    Which can interpret farther; only I say
    Thing's have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan
    Was pitied of Macbeth; marry, he was dead.
    And the right valiant Banquo walk'd too late,
    Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd,
    For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late.
    Who cannot want the thought, how monstrous
    It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain
    To kill their gracious father? Damned fact!
    How it did grieve Macbeth! Did he not straight,
    In pious rage, the two delinquents tear
    That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
    Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too,
    For 'twould have anger'd any heart alive
    To hear the men deny't. So that, I say,
    He has borne all things well; and I do think  
    That, had he Duncan's sons under his key-
    As, an't please heaven, he shall not -they should find
    What 'twere to kill a father; so should Fleance.
    But, peace! For from broad words, and 'cause he fail'd
    His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear,
    Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
    Where he bestows himself?
  LENNOX. Sent he to Macduff?
  LENNOX. And that well might
    Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance
    His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel
    Fly to the court of England and unfold
    His message ere he come, that a swift blessing
    May soon return to this our suffering country
    Under a hand accursed!
  LENNOX. What's your Grace's will?
  LENNOX. No, my lord.  
  LENNOX. No indeed, my lord.
  LENNOX. 'Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word
    Macduff is fled to England.
  LENNOX. Ay, my good lord.
  LENNOX. For certain, sir, he is not; I have a file
    Of all the gentry. There is Seward's son
    And many unrough youths that even now
    Protest their first of manhood.
  LENNOX. Or so much as it needs
    To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.
    Make we our march towards Birnam.           Exeunt marching.
SCENE III.
Dunsinane. A room in the castle.
Enter Macbeth, Doctor, and Attendants.
