  MACDUFF. Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,
    That you do lie so late?
  MACDUFF. What three things does drink especially provoke?
  MACDUFF. I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.
  MACDUFF. Is thy master stirring?
                             Enter Macbeth.
    Our knocking has awaked him; here he comes.
  MACDUFF. Is the King stirring, worthy Thane?
  MACDUFF. He did command me to call timely on him;
    I have almost slipp'd the hour.
  MACDUFF. I know this is a joyful trouble to you,
    But yet 'tis one.
  MACDUFF. O horror, horror, horror! Tongue nor heart
    Cannot conceive nor name thee.
  MACDUFF. Confusion now hath made his masterpiece.
    Most sacrilegious murther hath broke ope  
    The Lord's anointed temple and stole thence
    The life o' the building.
  MACDUFF. Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight
    With a new Gorgon. Do not bid me speak;
    See, and then speak yourselves.
                                      Exeunt Macbeth and Lennox.
    Awake, awake!
    Ring the alarum bell. Murther and treason!
    Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm, awake!
    Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit,
    And look on death itself! Up, up, and see
    The great doom's image! Malcolm! Banquo!
    As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites
    To countenance this horror! Ring the bell.       Bell rings.
                     Enter Lady Macbeth.
  MACDUFF. O gentle lady,
    'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak:
    The repetition in a woman's ear
    Would murther as it fell.
                     Enter Banquo.
    O Banquo, Banquo!
    Our royal master's murther'd.
  MACDUFF. Your royal father's murther'd.
   MALCOLM. O, by whom?
  MACDUFF. Wherefore did you so?
  MACDUFF. Look to the lady.
  MACDUFF. And so do I.
  MACDUFF. Why, see you not?
  MACDUFF. Those that Macbeth hath slain.
  MACDUFF. They were suborn'd:
    Malcolm and Donalbain, the King's two sons,
    Are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them
    Suspicion of the deed.  
  MACDUFF. He is already named, and gone to Scone
    To be invested.
  MACDUFF. Carried to Colmekill,
    The sacred storehouse of his predecessors
    And guardian of their bones.
  MACDUFF. No, cousin, I'll to Fife.
  MACDUFF. Well, may you see things well done there.
    Adieu,
    Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!
  MACDUFF. Let us rather
    Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men
    Bestride our downfall'n birthdom. Each new morn
    New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows
    Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
    As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out
    Like syllable of dolor.
  MACDUFF. I am not treacherous.
  MACDUFF. I have lost my hopes.
  MACDUFF. Bleed, bleed, poor country!
    Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure,  
    For goodness dare not check thee. Wear thou thy wrongs;
    The title is affeer'd. Fare thee well, lord.
    I would not be the villain that thou think'st
    For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp
    And the rich East to boot.
  MACDUFF. What should he be?
  MACDUFF. Not in the legions
    Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd
    In evils to top Macbeth.
  MACDUFF. Boundless intemperance
    In nature is a tyranny; it hath been  
    The untimely emptying of the happy throne,
    And fall of many kings. But fear not yet
    To take upon you what is yours. You may
    Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty
    And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink.
    We have willing dames enough; there cannot be
    That vulture in you to devour so many
    As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
    Finding it so inclined.
  MACDUFF. This avarice
    Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root  
    Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been
    The sword of our slain kings. Yet do not fear;
    Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will
    Of your mere own. All these are portable,
    With other graces weigh'd.
  MACDUFF. O Scotland, Scotland!
  MACDUFF. Fit to govern?
    No, not to live. O nation miserable!  
    With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd,
    When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,
    Since that the truest issue of thy throne
    By his own interdiction stands accursed
    And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father
    Was a most sainted king; the queen that bore thee,
    Oftener upon her knees than on her feet,
    Died every day she lived. Fare thee well!
    These evils thou repeat'st upon thyself
    Have banish'd me from Scotland. O my breast,
    Thy hope ends here!
  MACDUFF. Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
    'Tis hard to reconcile.
                     Enter a Doctor.
  
  MACDUFF. What's the disease he means?
  MACDUFF. See, who comes here?
  MACDUFF. My ever gentle cousin, welcome hither.
  MACDUFF. Stands Scotland where it did?
  MACDUFF. O, relation
    Too nice, and yet too true!
  MACDUFF. How does my wife?
  MACDUFF. And all my children?
  MACDUFF. The tyrant has not batter'd at their peace?
  MACDUFF. Be not a niggard of your speech. How goest?
  MACDUFF. What concern they?
    The general cause? Or is it a fee-grief
    Due to some single breast?
  MACDUFF. If it be mine,
    Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.
  MACDUFF. Humh! I guess at it.
  MACDUFF. My children too?
  MACDUFF. And I must be from thence!
    My wife kill'd too?
  MACDUFF. He has no children. All my pretty ones?
    Did you say all? O hell-kite! All?
    What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
    At one fell swoop?
  MACDUFF. I shall do so,
    But I must also feel it as a man.
    I cannot but remember such things were
    That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on,
    And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
    They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am,
    Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
    Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now!
  MACDUFF. O, I could play the woman with mine eyes
    And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,
    Cut short all intermission; front to front
    Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself;
    Within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape,  
    Heaven forgive him too!
  MACDUFF. Let our just censures
    Attend the true event, and put we on
    Industrious soldiership.
  MACDUFF. Make all our trumpets speak, give them all breath,
    Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
                                                         Exeunt.
SCENE VII.
Dunsinane.  Before the castle.  Alarums.
Enter Macbeth.
  MACDUFF. That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!
    If thou best slain and with no stroke of mine,
    My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still.
    I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms
    Are hired to bear their staves. Either thou, Macbeth,
    Or else my sword, with an unbatter'd edge,
    I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be;
    By this great clatter, one of greatest note
    Seems bruited. Let me find him, Fortune!
    And more I beg not.                           Exit. Alarums.
                Enter Malcolm and old Siward.
  
  MACDUFF. Turn, hell hound, turn!
  MACDUFF. I have no words.
    My voice is in my sword, thou bloodier villain
    Than terms can give thee out!                    They fight.
  MACDUFF. Despair thy charm,
    And let the angel whom thou still hast served
    Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb
    Untimely ripp'd.
  MACDUFF. Then yield thee, coward,
    And live to be the show and gaze o' the time.
    We'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
    Painted upon a pole, and underwrit,
    "Here may you see the tyrant."
  MACDUFF. Hail, King, for so thou art. Behold where stands
    The usurper's cursed head. The time is free.
    I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl
    That speak my salutation in their minds,
    Whose voices I desire aloud with mine-
    Hail, King of Scotland!
