  SILVIA. Sir Valentine and servant, to you two thousand.
  SILVIA. I thank you, gentle servant. 'Tis very clerkly done.
  SILVIA. Perchance you think too much of so much pains?
  SILVIA. A pretty period! Well, I guess the sequel;
    And yet I will not name it- and yet I care not.
    And yet take this again- and yet I thank you-
    Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.
  SILVIA. Yes, yes; the lines are very quaintly writ;
    But, since unwillingly, take them again.
    Nay, take them.                      [Gives hack the letter]
  SILVIA. Ay, ay, you writ them, sir, at my request;
    But I will none of them; they are for you:  
    I would have had them writ more movingly.
  SILVIA. And when it's writ, for my sake read it over;
    And if it please you, so; if not, why, so.
  SILVIA. Why, if it please you, take it for your labour.
    And so good morrow, servant.                     Exit SILVIA
  SILVIA. Servant!
  SILVIA. Servant, you are sad.
  SILVIA. What, angry, Sir Thurio! Do you change colour?
  SILVIA. A fine volley of words, gentlemen, and quickly shot off.
  SILVIA. Who is that, servant?
  SILVIA. No more, gentlemen, no more. Here comes my father.
  SILVIA. Belike that now she hath enfranchis'd them
    Upon some other pawn for fealty.
  SILVIA. Nay, then, he should be blind; and, being blind,
    How could he see his way to seek out you?
  SILVIA. Have done, have done; here comes the gentleman.
  SILVIA. His worth is warrant for his welcome hither,
    If this be he you oft have wish'd to hear from.
  SILVIA. Too low a mistress for so high a servant.
  SILVIA. And duty never yet did want his meed.
    Servant, you are welcome to a worthless mistress.
  SILVIA. That you are welcome?
  SILVIA. I wait upon his pleasure. Come, Sir Thurio,
    Go with me. Once more, new servant, welcome.
    I'll leave you to confer of home affairs;
    When you have done we look to hear from you.
  SILVIA. I thank you for your music, gentlemen.  
    Who is that that spake?
  SILVIA. Sir Proteus, as I take it.
  SILVIA. What's your will?
  SILVIA. You have your wish; my will is even this,
    That presently you hie you home to bed.
    Thou subtle, perjur'd, false, disloyal man,
    Think'st thou I am so shallow, so conceitless,
    To be seduced by thy flattery
    That hast deceiv'd so many with thy vows?
    Return, return, and make thy love amends.
    For me, by this pale queen of night I swear,
    I am so far from granting thy request
    That I despise thee for thy wrongful suit,
    And by and by intend to chide myself
    Even for this time I spend in talking to thee.
  SILVIA. Say that she be; yet Valentine, thy friend,
    Survives, to whom, thyself art witness,
    I am betroth'd; and art thou not asham'd
    To wrong him with thy importunacy?
  SILVIA. And so suppose am I; for in his grave
    Assure thyself my love is buried.
  SILVIA. Go to thy lady's grave, and call hers thence;
    Or, at the least, in hers sepulchre thine.
  SILVIA. I am very loath to be your idol, sir;
    But since your falsehood shall become you well
    To worship shadows and adore false shapes,
    Send to me in the morning, and I'll send it;
    And so, good rest.
  SILVIA. Who calls?
  SILVIA. Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good morrow!
  SILVIA. O Eglamour, thou art a gentleman-
    Think not I flatter, for I swear I do not-  
    Valiant, wise, remorseful, well accomplish'd.
    Thou art not ignorant what dear good will
    I bear unto the banish'd Valentine;
    Nor how my father would enforce me marry
    Vain Thurio, whom my very soul abhors.
    Thyself hast lov'd; and I have heard thee say
    No grief did ever come so near thy heart
    As when thy lady and thy true love died,
    Upon whose grave thou vow'dst pure chastity.
    Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine,
    To Mantua, where I hear he makes abode;
    And, for the ways are dangerous to pass,
    I do desire thy worthy company,
    Upon whose faith and honour I repose.
    Urge not my father's anger, Eglamour,
    But think upon my grief, a lady's grief,
    And on the justice of my flying hence
    To keep me from a most unholy match,
    Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues.
    I do desire thee, even from a heart  
    As full of sorrows as the sea of sands,
    To bear me company and go with me;
    If not, to hide what I have said to thee,
    That I may venture to depart alone.
  SILVIA. This evening coming.
  SILVIA. At Friar Patrick's cell,
    Where I intend holy confession.
  SILVIA. Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour.                 Exeunt
SCENE IV.
Under SILVIA'S Window
Enter LAUNCE with his dog
  SILVIA. What would you with her, if that I be she?
  SILVIA. From whom?
  SILVIA. O, he sends you for a picture?
  SILVIA. Ursula, bring my picture there.
    Go, give your master this. Tell him from me,
    One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget,
    Would better fit his chamber than this shadow.
  SILVIA. I pray thee let me look on that again.
  SILVIA. There, hold!
    I will not look upon your master's lines.
    I know they are stuff'd with protestations,
    And full of new-found oaths, which he wul break
    As easily as I do tear his paper.
  SILVIA. The more shame for him that he sends it me;
    For I have heard him say a thousand times
    His Julia gave it him at his departure.
    Though his false finger have profan'd the ring,  
    Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong.
  SILVIA. What say'st thou?
  SILVIA. Dost thou know her?
  SILVIA. Belike she thinks that Proteus hath forsook her.
  SILVIA. Is she not passing fair?
  SILVIA. How tall was she?
  SILVIA. She is beholding to thee, gentle youth.
    Alas, poor lady, desolate and left!
    I weep myself, to think upon thy words.
    Here, youth, there is my purse; I give thee this  
    For thy sweet mistress' sake, because thou lov'st her.
    Farewell.                        Exit SILVIA with ATTENDANTS
  SILVIA. Amen, amen! Go on, good Eglamour,
    Out at the postern by the abbey wall;
    I fear I am attended by some spies.
  SILVIA. A thousand more mischances than this one
    Have learn'd me how to brook this patiently.
  SILVIA. O Valentine, this I endure for thee!            Exeunt
SCENE IV.
Another part of the forest
Enter VALENTINE
  SILVIA. O miserable, unhappy that I am!
  SILVIA. By thy approach thou mak'st me most unhappy.
  SILVIA. Had I been seized by a hungry lion,  
    I would have been a breakfast to the beast
    Rather than have false Proteus rescue me.
    O, heaven be judge how I love Valentine,
    Whose life's as tender to me as my soul!
    And full as much, for more there cannot be,
    I do detest false, perjur'd Proteus.
    Therefore be gone; solicit me no more.
  SILVIA. When Proteus cannot love where he's belov'd!
    Read over Julia's heart, thy first best love,
    For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith
    Into a thousand oaths; and all those oaths
    Descended into perjury, to love me.
    Thou hast no faith left now, unless thou'dst two,
    And that's far worse than none; better have none
    Than plural faith, which is too much by one.
    Thou counterfeit to thy true friend!  
  SILVIA. All men but Proteus.
  SILVIA. O heaven!
