  Claud. Benedick, didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato?
  Claud. Is she not a modest young lady?
  Claud. No. I pray thee speak in sober judgment.
  Claud. Thou thinkest I am in sport. I pray thee tell me truly how
    thou lik'st her.
  Claud. Can the world buy such a jewel?
  Claud. In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever I look'd on.
  Claud. I would scarce trust myself, though I had sworn the
    contrary, if Hero would be my wife.
  Claud. If this were so, so were it utt'red.
  Claud. If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it should be
    otherwise.  
  Claud. You speak this to fetch me in, my lord.
  Claud. And, in faith, my lord, I spoke mine.
  Claud. That I love her, I feel.
  Claud. And never could maintain his part but in the force of his
    will.
  Claud. If this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad.  
  Claud. To the tuition of God. From my house--if I had it--
  Claud. My liege, your Highness now may do me good.
  Claud. Hath Leonato any son, my lord?  
  Claud.O my lord,
    When you went onward on this ended action,
    I look'd upon her with a soldier's eye,
    That lik'd, but had a rougher task in hand
    Than to drive liking to the name of love;
    But now I am return'd and that war-thoughts
    Have left their places vacant, in their rooms
    Come thronging soft and delicate desires,
    All prompting me how fair young Hero is,
    Saying I lik'd her ere I went to wars.
  Claud. How sweetly you do minister to love,
    That know love's grief by his complexion!  
    But lest my liking might too sudden seem,
    I would have salv'd it with a longer treatise.
  Claud. You know me well. I am he.
  Claud. How know you he loves her?
  Claud. Thus answer I in name of Benedick
    But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio.
                                                      [Unmasks.]
    'Tis certain so. The Prince wooes for himself.
    Friendship is constant in all other things
    Save in the office and affairs of love.
    Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues;
    Let every eye negotiate for itself  
    And trust no agent; for beauty is a witch
    Against whose charms faith melteth into blood.
    This is an accident of hourly proof,
    Which I mistrusted not. Farewell therefore Hero!
                  Enter Benedick [unmasked].
  Claud. Yea, the same.
  Claud. Whither?
  Claud. I wish him joy of her.
  Claud. I pray you leave me.  
  Claud. If it will not be, I'll leave you.                Exit.
  Claud. Not sad, my lord.
  Claud. Neither, my lord.
  Claud. Silence is the perfectest herald of joy. I were but little
    happy if I could say how much. Lady, as you are mine, I am yours.
    I give away myself for you and dote upon the exchange.
  Claud. And so she doth, cousin.
  Claud. To-morrow, my lord. Time goes on crutches till love have all
    his rites.
  Claud. And I, my lord.
  Claud. Yea, my good lord. How still the evening is,
    As hush'd on purpose to grace harmony!
  Claud. O, very well, my lord. The music ended,
    We'll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth.
                   Enter Balthasar with Music.
  Claud. O, ay!-[Aside to Pedro] Stalk on, stalk on; the fowl sits.
    --I did never think that lady would have loved any man.
  Claud. Faith, like enough.
  Claud. [aside] Bait the hook well! This fish will bite.
  Claud. She did indeed.
  Claud. [aside] He hath ta'en th' infection. Hold it up.
  Claud. 'Tis true indeed. So your daughter says. 'Shall I,' says
    she, 'that have so oft encount'red him with scorn, write to him
    that I love him?'"
  Claud. Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember a pretty jest
    your daughter told us of.  
  Claud. That.
  Claud. Then down upon her knees she falls, weeps, sobs, beats her
    heart, tears her hair, prays, curses--'O sweet Benedick! God give
    me patience!'
  Claud. To what end? He would make but a sport of it and torment the
    poor lady worse.
  Claud. And she is exceeding wise.
  Claud. Hero thinks surely she will die; for she says she will die
    if he love her not, and she will die ere she make her love known,
    and she will die, if he woo her, rather than she will bate one
    breath of her accustomed crossness.
  Claud. He is a very proper man.
  Claud. Before God! and in my mind, very wise.
  Claud. And I take him to be valiant.
  Claud. Never tell him, my lord. Let her wear it out with good
    counsel.
  Claud. If he dote on her upon this, I will never trust my
    expectation.
  Claud. I'll bring you thither, my lord, if you'll vouchsafe me.
  Claud. I hope he be in love.
  Claud. You must hang it first and draw it afterwards.
  Claud. Yet say I he is in love.
  Claud. If he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing
    old signs. 'A brushes his hat o' mornings. What should that bode?
  Claud. No, but the barber's man hath been seen with him, and the
     old ornament of his cheek hath already stuff'd tennis balls.
  Claud. That's as much as to say, the sweet youth's in love.
  Claud. And when was he wont to wash his face?
  Claud. Nay, but his jesting spirit, which is new-crept into a
    lutestring, and now govern'd by stops.
  Claud. Nay, but I know who loves him.
  Claud. Yes, and his ill conditions; and in despite of all, dies for
    him.
  Claud. 'Tis even so. Hero and Margaret have by this played their
    parts with Beatrice, and then the two bears will not bite one
    another when they meet.
                 Enter John the Bastard.
  Claud. If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.
  Claud. Who? Hero?
  Claud. Disloyal?
  Claud. May this be so?
  Claud. If I see anything to-night why I should not marry her
    to-morrow, in the congregation where I should wed, there will I
    shame her.
  Claud. O mischief strangely thwarting!
  Claud. No.
  Claud. Know you any, Hero?
  Claud. O, what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily do, not
    knowing what they do!  
  Claud. Stand thee by, friar. Father, by your leave:
    Will you with free and unconstrained soul
    Give me this maid your daughter?
  Claud. And what have I to give you back whose worth
    May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?
  Claud. Sweet Prince, you learn me noble thankfulness.
    There, Leonato, take her back again.
    Give not this rotten orange to your friend.
    She's but the sign and semblance of her honour.
    Behold how like a maid she blushes here!
    O, what authority and show of truth
    Can cunning sin cover itself withal!
    Comes not that blood as modest evidence
    To witness simple virtue, Would you not swear,
    All you that see her, that she were a maid
    By these exterior shows? But she is none:  
    She knows the heat of a luxurious bed;
    Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.
  Claud. Not to be married,
    Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.
  Claud. I know what you would say. If I have known her,
    You will say she did embrace me as a husband,
    And so extenuate the forehand sin.
    No, Leonato,
    I never tempted her with word too large,
    But, as a brother to his sister, show'd
    Bashful sincerity and comely love.
  Claud. Out on the seeming! I will write against it.
    You seem to me as Dian in her orb,
    As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown;
    But you are more intemperate in your blood  
    Than Venus, or those pamp'red animals
    That rage in savage sensuality.
  Claud. Leonato, stand I here?
    Is this the Prince, Is this the Prince's brother?
    Is this face Hero's? Are our eyes our own?
  Claud. Let me but move one question to your daughter,
    And by that fatherly and kindly power
    That you have in her, bid her answer truly.
  Claud. To make you answer truly to your name.
  Claud. Marry, that can Hero!
    Hero itself can blot out Hero's virtue.
    What man was he talk'd with you yesternight,
    Out at your window betwixt twelve and one?
    Now, if you are a maid, answer to this.
  Claud. O Hero! what a Hero hadst thou been
    If half thy outward graces had been plac'd
    About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart!
    But fare thee well, most foul, most fair! Farewell,
    Thou pure impiety and impious purity!
    For thee I'll lock up all the gates of love,
    And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang,
    To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
    And never shall it more be gracious.
  Claud. Good day to both of you.
  Claud. Who wrongs him?
  Claud. Mary, beshrew my hand
    If it should give your age such cause of fear.
    In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.
  Claud. My villany?
  Claud. Away! I will not have to do with you.
  Claud. Now, signior, what news?
  Claud. We had lik'd to have had our two noses snapp'd off with two
    old men without teeth.
  Claud. We have been up and down to seek thee; for we are high-proof
    melancholy, and would fain have it beaten away. Wilt thou use thy  
    wit?
  Claud. Never any did so, though very many have been beside their
    wit. I will bid thee draw, as we do the minstrel--draw to
    pleasure us.
  Claud. What, courage, man! What though care kill'd a cat, thou hast
    mettle enough in thee to kill care.
  Claud. Nay then, give him another staff; this last was broke cross.
  Claud. If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.
  Claud. God bless me from a challenge!
  Claud. Well, I will meet you, so I may have good cheer.
  Claud. I' faith, I thank him, he hath bid me to a calve's head and
    a capon, the which if I do not carve most curiously, say my
    knife's naught. Shall I not find a woodcock too?
  Claud. For the which she wept heartily and said she cared not.
  Claud. All, all! and moreover, God saw him when he was hid in the
    garden.
  Claud. Yea, and text underneath, 'Here dwells Benedick, the married
    man'?
  Claud. In most profound earnest; and, I'll warrant you, for the  
    love of Beatrice.
  Claud. Most sincerely.
  Claud. He is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape a doctor to
    such a man.
  Claud. Hearken after their offence, my lord.
  Claud. Rightly reasoned, and in his own division; and by my troth
    there's one meaning well suited.
  Claud. I have drunk poison whiles he utter'd it.
  Claud. Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appear
    In the rare semblance that I lov'd it first.
  Claud. I know not how to pray your patience;
    Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself;
    Impose me to what penance your invention
    Can lay upon my sin. Yet sinn'd I not
    But in mistaking.
  Claud. O noble sir!
    Your over-kindness doth wring tears from me.
    I do embrace your offer; and dispose
    For henceforth of poor Claudio.
  Claud. To-night I'll mourn with Hero.
                                 [Exeunt Don Pedro and Claudio.]
  Claud. Is this the monument of Leonato?
  Claud. [reads from a scroll]
                      Epitaph.
        Done to death by slanderous tongues
          Was the Hero that here lies.
        Death, in guerdon of her wrongs,
          Gives her fame which never dies.
        So the life that died with shame
        Lives in death with glorious fame.
    Hang thou there upon the tomb,
                                          [Hangs up the scroll.]
    Praising her when I am dumb.  
    Now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn.
                     Song.
        Pardon, goddess of the night,
        Those that slew thy virgin knight;
        For the which, with songs of woe,
        Round about her tomb they go.
        Midnight, assist our moan,
        Help us to sigh and groan
          Heavily, heavily,
        Graves, yawn and yield your dead,
        Till death be uttered
          Heavily, heavily.
  Claud. Now unto thy bones good night!
    Yearly will I do this rite.
  Claud. Now unto thy bones good night!
    Yearly will I do this rite.
  Claud. Good morrow, masters. Each his several way.
  Claud. And Hymen now with luckier issue speeds
    Than this for whom we rend'red up this woe.          Exeunt.
Scene IV
The hall in Leonato's house.
Enter Leonato, Benedick, [Beatrice,] Margaret, Ursula, Antonio,
Friar [Francis], Hero.
  Claud. I'll hold my mind, were she an Ethiope.
  Claud. I think he thinks upon the savage bull.
    Tush, fear not, man! We'll tip thy horns with gold,
    And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
    As once Europa did at lusty Jove
    When he would play the noble beast in love.
  Claud. For this I owe you. Here comes other reckonings.
    Which is the lady I must seize upon?
  Claud. Why then, she's mine. Sweet, let me see your face.
  Claud. Give me your hand before this holy friar.
    I am your husband if you like of me.
  Claud. Another Hero!
  Claud. And I'll be sworn upon't that he loves her;
    For here's a paper written in his hand,
    A halting sonnet of his own pure brain,
    Fashion'd to Beatrice.
  Claud. I had well hop'd thou wouldst have denied Beatrice, that I
    might have cudgell'd thee out of thy single life, to make thee a
    double-dealer, which out of question thou wilt be if my cousin do
    not look exceeding narrowly to thee.
