  Hero. My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua.
  Hero. He is of a very melancholy disposition.
  Hero. So you walk softly and look sweetly and say nothing,
    I am yours for the walk; and especially when I walk away.
  Hero. I may say so when I please.
  Hero. When I like your favour, for God defend the lute should be
    like the case!
  Hero. Why then, your visor should be thatch'd.
  Hero. I will do any modest office, my lord, to help my cousin to a
    good husband.
  Hero. Good Margaret, run thee to the parlour.
    There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice
    Proposing with the Prince and Claudio.
    Whisper her ear and tell her, I and Ursley
    Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse
    Is all of her. Say that thou overheard'st us;
    And bid her steal into the pleached bower,
    Where honeysuckles, ripened by the sun,
    Forbid the sun to enter--like favourites,
    Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
    Against that power that bred it. There will she hide her
    To listen our propose. This is thy office.
    Bear thee well in it and leave us alone.
  Hero. Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come,
    As we do trace this alley up and down,
    Our talk must only be of Benedick.  
    When I do name him, let it be thy part
    To praise him more than ever man did merit.
    My talk to thee must be how Benedick
    Is sick in love with Beatrice. Of this matter
    Is little Cupid's crafty arrow made,
    That only wounds by hearsay.
                   [Enter Beatrice.]
    Now begin;
    For look where Beatrice like a lapwing runs
    Close by the ground, to hear our conference.
               [Beatrice hides in the arbour].
  Hero. Then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing
    Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it.
                                     [They approach the arbour.]
    No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful.
    I know her spirits are as coy and wild
    As haggards of the rock.
  Hero. So says the Prince, and my new-trothed lord.
  Hero. They did entreat me to acquaint her of it;
    But I persuaded them, if they lov'd Benedick,
    To wish him wrestle with affection
    And never to let Beatrice know of it.
  Hero. O god of love! I know he doth deserve
    As much as may be yielded to a man:  
    But Nature never fram'd a woman's heart
    Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice.
    Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes,
    Misprizing what they look on; and her wit
    Values itself so highly that to her
    All matter else seems weak. She cannot love,
    Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
    She is so self-endeared.
  Hero. Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw man,
    How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featur'd,
    But she would spell him backward. If fair-fac'd,
    She would swear the gentleman should be her sister;
    If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antic,
    Made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed;
    If low, an agate very vilely cut;
    If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds;
    If silent, why, a block moved with none.  
    So turns she every man the wrong side out
    And never gives to truth and virtue that
    Which simpleness and merit purchaseth.
  Hero. No, not to be so odd, and from all fashions,
    As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable.
    But who dare tell her so? If I should speak,
    She would mock me into air; O, she would laugh me
    Out of myself, press me to death with wit!
    Therefore let Benedick, like cover'd fire,
    Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly.
    It were a better death than die with mocks,
    Which is as bad as die with tickling.
  Hero. No; rather I will go to Benedick
    And counsel him to fight against his passion.
    And truly, I'll devise some honest slanders
    To stain my cousin with. One doth not know
    How much an ill word may empoison liking.
  Hero. He is the only man of Italy,
    Always excepted my dear Claudio.
  Hero. Indeed he hath an excellent good name.
  Hero. Why, every day to-morrow! Come, go in.
    I'll show thee some attires, and have thy counsel
    Which is the best to furnish me to-morrow.
                                               [They walk away.]
  Hero. If it prove so, then loving goes by haps;
    Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.  
                                       Exeunt [Hero and Ursula].
    [Beatrice advances from the arbour.]
  Hero. Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice and desire her to rise.
  Hero. And bid her come hither.
  Hero. No, pray thee, good Meg, I'll wear this.
  Hero. My cousin's a fool, and thou art another. I'll wear none but
    this.
  Hero. O, that exceeds, they say.
  Hero. God give me joy to wear it! for my heart is exceeding heavy.
  Hero. Fie upon thee! art not ashamed?
  Hero. Good morrow, coz.
  Hero. Why, how now? Do you speak in the sick tune?
  Hero. These gloves the Count sent me, they are an excellent
    perfume.
  Hero. There thou prick'st her with a thistle.
  Hero. Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, good Ursula.
                                                       [Exeunt.]
Scene V.
The hall in Leonato's house.
Enter Leonato and the Constable [Dogberry] and the Headborough [verges].
  Hero. I do.
  Hero. None, my lord.
  Hero. And seem'd I ever otherwise to you?
  Hero. Is my lord well that he doth speak so wide?
  Hero. 'True!' O God!
  Hero. O, God defend me! How am I beset!  
    What kind of catechising call you this?
  Hero. Is it not Hero? Who can blot that name
    With any just reproach?
  Hero. I talk'd with no man at that hour, my lord.
  Hero. They know that do accuse me; I know none.
    If I know more of any man alive
    Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant,
    Let all my sins lack mercy! O my father,
    Prove you that any man with me convers'd
    At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
    Maintain'd the change of words with any creature,
    Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!
  Hero. And when I liv'd I was your other wife;       [Unmasks.]
    And when you lov'd you were my other husband.
  Hero. Nothing certainer.
    One Hero died defil'd; but I do live,
    And surely as I live, I am a maid.
  Hero. And here's another,
    Writ in my cousin's hand, stol'n from her pocket,
    Containing her affection unto Benedick.
