  Leon. I learn in this letter that Don Pedro of Arragon comes this
    night to Messina.
  Leon. How many gentlemen have you lost in this action?
  Leon. A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full
    numbers. I find here that Don Pedro hath bestowed much honour on
    a young Florentine called Claudio.
  Leon. He hath an uncle here in Messina will be very much glad of it.
  Leon. Did he break out into tears?
  Leon. A kind overflow of kindness. There are no faces truer than
    those that are so wash'd. How much better is it to weep at joy
    than to joy at weeping!
  Leon. What is he that you ask for, niece?
  Leon. Faith, niece, you tax Signior Benedick too much; but he'll  
    be meet with you, I doubt it not.
  Leon. You must not, sir, mistake my niece. There is a kind of merry
    war betwixt Signior Benedick and her. They never meet but there's
    a skirmish of wit between them.
  Leon. You will never run mad, niece.
  Leon. Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your Grace;
    for trouble being gone, comfort should remain; but when you depart
    from me, sorrow abides and happiness takes his leave.
  Leon. Her mother hath many times told me so.
  Leon. Signior Benedick, no; for then were you a child.
  Leon. If you swear, my lord, you shall not be forsworn. [To Don
    John] Let me bid you welcome, my lord. Being reconciled to the
    Prince your brother, I owe you all duty.
  Leon. Please it your Grace lead on?
  Leon. How now, brother? Where is my cousin your son? Hath he
    provided this music?
  Leon. Are they good?
  Leon. Hath the fellow any wit that told you this?
  Leon. No, no. We will hold it as a dream till it appear itself; but  
    I will acquaint my daughter withal, that she may be the better
    prepared for an answer, if peradventure this be true. Go you and
    tell her of it.                              [Exit Antonio.]
         [Enter Antonio's Son with a Musician, and others.]
    [To the Son] Cousin, you know what you have to do.
    --[To the Musician] O, I cry you mercy, friend. Go you with me,
    and I will use your skill.--Good cousin, have a care this busy
    time.                                                Exeunt.
Scene III.
Another room in Leonato's house.]
Enter Sir John the Bastard and Conrade, his companion.
  Leon. Was not Count John here at supper?
  Leon. Then half Signior Benedick's tongue in Count John's mouth,
    and half Count John's melancholy in Signior Benedick's face--
  Leon. By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband if
    thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.  
  Leon. So, by being too curst, God will send you no horns.
  Leon. You may light on a husband that hath no beard.
  Leon. Well then, go you into hell?
  Leon. Well, niece, I hope to see you one day fitted with a husband.
  Leon. Daughter, remember what I told you. If the Prince do solicit
    you in that kind, you know your answer.
  Leon. Cousin, you apprehend passing shrewdly.
  Leon. The revellers are ent'ring, brother. Make good room.
                                                 [Exit Antonio.]
    Enter, [masked,] Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick, and Balthasar.
       [With them enter Antonio, also masked. After them enter]
       Don John [and Borachio (without masks), who stand aside
                 and look on during the dance].
  Leon. Count, take of me my daughter, and with her my fortunes. His
    Grace hath made the match, and all grace say Amen to it!
  Leon. Niece, will you look to those things I told you of?
  Leon. There's little of the melancholy element in her, my lord. She
    is never sad but when she sleeps, and not ever sad then; for I
    have heard my daughter say she hath often dreamt of unhappiness
    and wak'd herself with laughing.
  Leon. O, by no means! She mocks all her wooers out of suit.
  Leon. O Lord, my lord! if they were but a week married, they would
    talk themselves mad.
  Leon. Not till Monday, my dear son, which is hence a just
    sevennight; and a time too brief too, to have all things answer
    my mind.
  Leon. My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten nights'
    watchings.
  Leon. No, nor I neither; but most wonderful that she should so dote
    on Signior Benedick, whom she hath in all outward behaviours
    seem'd ever to abhor.
  Leon. By my troth, my lord, I cannot tell what to think of it, but
    that she loves him with an enraged affection. It is past the
    infinite of thought.
  Leon. O God, counterfeit? There was never counterfeit of passion
    came so near the life of passion as she discovers it.
  Leon. What effects, my lord? She will sit you--you heard my
    daughter tell you how.  
  Leon. I would have sworn it had, my lord--especially against
    Benedick.
  Leon. No, and swears she never will. That's her torment.
  Leon. This says she now when she is beginning to write to him; for
    she'll be up twenty times a night, and there will she sit in her
    smock till she have writ a sheet of paper. My daughter tells us
    all.
  Leon. O, when she had writ it, and was reading it over, she found
    'Benedick' and 'Beatrice' between the sheet?
  Leon. O, she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence, rail'd at
    herself that she should be so immodest to write to one that she
    knew would flout her. 'I measure him,' says she, 'by my own
    spirit; for I should flout him if he writ to me. Yea, though I
    love him, I should.'
  Leon. She doth indeed; my daughter says so. And the ecstasy hath so
    much overborne her that my daughter is sometime afeard she will
    do a desperate outrage to herself. It is very true.
  Leon. O, my lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body,
    we have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory. I am sorry
    for her, as I have just cause, being her uncle and her guardian.
  Leon. Were it good, think you?
  Leon. If he do fear God, 'a must necessarily keep peace. If he
    break the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and
    trembling.
  Leon. Nay, that's impossible; she may wear her heart out first.
  Leon. My lord, will you .walk? Dinner is ready.
                                               [They walk away.]  
  Leon. So say I. Methinks you are sadder.
  Leon. Where is but a humour or a worm.
  Leon. Indeed he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.  
  Leon. What would you with me, honest neighbour?
  Leon. Brief, I pray you; for you see it is a busy time with me.
  Leon. What is it, my good friends?
  Leon. Neighbours, you are tedious.
  Leon. All thy tediousness on me, ah?
  Leon. I would fain know what you have to say.
  Leon. Indeed, neighbour, he comes too short of you.
  Leon. I must leave you.
  Leon. Take their examination yourself and bring it me. I am now in
    great haste, as it may appear unto you.
  Leon. Drink some wine ere you go. Fare you well.
                       [Enter a Messenger.]
  Leon. I'll wait upon them. I am ready.
                                 [Exeunt Leonato and Messenger.]
  Leon. Come, Friar Francis, be brief. Only to the plain form of
    marriage, and you shall recount their particular duties
    afterwards.
  Leon. To be married to her. Friar, you come to marry her.
  Leon. I dare make his answer--none.
  Leon. As freely, son, as God did give her me.
  Leon. What do you mean, my lord?
  Leon. Dear my lord, if you, in your own proof,
    Have vanquish'd the resistance of her youth
    And made defeat of her virginity--
  Leon. Sweet Prince, why speak not you?
  Leon. Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?
  Leon. All this is so; but what of this, my lord?
  Leon. I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.
  Leon. Hath no man's dagger here a point for me?
                                                  [Hero swoons.]
  Leon. O Fate, take not away thy heavy hand!
    Death is the fairest cover for her shame
    That may be wish'd for.
  Leon. Dost thou look up?
  Leon. Wherefore? Why, doth not every earthly thing
    Cry shame upon her? Could she here deny
    The story that is printed in her blood?
    Do not live, Hero; do not ope thine eyes;
    For, did I think thou wouldst not quickly die,
    Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames,
    Myself would on the rearward of reproaches
    Strike at thy life. Griev'd I, I had but one?
    Child I for that at frugal nature's frame?
    O, one too much by thee! Why had I one?
    Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes?
    Why had I not with charitable hand  
    Took up a beggar's issue at my gates,
    Who smirched thus and mir'd with infamy,
    I might have said, 'No part of it is mine;
    This shame derives itself from unknown loins'?
    But mine, and mine I lov'd, and mine I prais'd,
    And mine that I was proud on--mine so much
    That I myself was to myself not mine,
    Valuing of her--why, she, O, she is fall'n
    Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea
    Hath drops too few to wash her clean again,
    And salt too little which may season give
    To her foul tainted flesh!
  Leon. Confirm'd, confirm'd! O, that is stronger made  
    Which was before barr'd up with ribs of iron!
    Would the two princes lie? and Claudio lie,
    Who lov'd her so that, speaking of her foulness,
    Wash'd it with tears? Hence from her! let her die.
  Leon. Friar, it cannot be.
    Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left
    Is that she will not add to her damnation
    A sin of perjury: she not denies it.
    Why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse
    That which appears in proper nakedness?
  Leon. I know not. If they speak but truth of her,
    These hands shall tear her. If they wrong her honour,
    The proudest of them shall well hear of it.
    Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine,
    Nor age so eat up my invention,
    Nor fortune made such havoc of my means,
    Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends,
    But they shall find awak'd in such a kind
    Both strength of limb and policy of mind,
    Ability in means, and choice of friends,
    To quit me of them throughly.
  Leon. What shall become of this? What will this do?
  Leon. Being that I flow in grief,
    The smallest twine may lead me.
  Leon. I pray thee cease thy counsel,
    Which falls into mine ears as profitless
    As water in a sieve. Give not me counsel,
    Nor let no comforter delight mine ear
    But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine.
    Bring me a father that so lov'd his child,
    Whose joy of her is overwhelm'd like mine,
    And bid him speak to me of patience.
    Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine,
    And let it answer every strain for strain,
    As thus for thus, and such a grief for such,
    In every lineament, branch, shape, and form.
    If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
    Bid sorrow wag, cry 'hem' when he should groan,  
    Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk
    With candle-wasters--bring him yet to me,
    And I of him will gather patience.
    But there is no such man; for, brother, men
    Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief
    Which they themselves not feel; but, tasting it,
    Their counsel turns to passion, which before
    Would give preceptial medicine to rage,
    Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
    Charm ache with air and agony with words.
    No, no! 'Tis all men's office to speak patience
    To those that wring under the load of sorrow,
    But no man's virtue nor sufficiency
    To be so moral when he shall endure
    The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel.
    My griefs cry louder than advertisement.
  Leon. I pray thee peace. I will be flesh and blood;
    For there was never yet philosopher
    That could endure the toothache patiently,  
    However they have writ the style of gods
    And made a push at chance and sufferance.
  Leon. There thou speak'st reason. Nay, I will do so.
    My soul doth tell me Hero is belied;
    And that shall Claudio know; so shall the Prince,
    And all of them that thus dishonour her.
              Enter Don Pedro and Claudio.
  Leon. Hear you, my lords!
  Leon. Some haste, my lord! well, fare you well, my lord.
    Are you so hasty now? Well, all is one.
  Leon. Marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou!
    Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword;
    I fear thee not.
  Leon. Tush, tush, man! never fleer and jest at me
    I speak not like a dotard nor a fool,
    As under privilege of age to brag
    What I have done being young, or what would do,
    Were I not old. Know, Claudio, to thy head,
    Thou hast so wrong'd mine innocent child and me
    That I am forc'd to lay my reverence by
    And, with grey hairs and bruise of many days,
    Do challenge thee to trial of a man.
    I say thou hast belied mine innocent child;
    Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart,
    And she lied buried with her ancestors-  
    O, in a tomb where never scandal slept,
    Save this of hers, fram'd by thy villany!
  Leon. Thine, Claudio; thine I say.
  Leon. My lord, my lord,
    I'll prove it on his body if he dare,
    Despite his nice fence and his active practice,
    His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.
  Leon. Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast kill'd my child.
    If thou kill'st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.
    And. He shall kill two of us, and men indeed
    But that's no matter; let him kill one first.
    Win me and wear me! Let him answer me.
    Come, follow me, boy,. Come, sir boy, come follow me.
    Sir boy, I'll whip you from your foining fence!
    Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.
  Leon. Brother--
  Leon. Brother--
  Leon. Brother Anthony--
  Leon. But, brother Anthony--
  Leon. My lord, my lord--
  Leon. No? Come, brother, away!--I will be heard.
  Leon. Which is the villain? Let me see his eyes,  
    That, when I note another man like him,
    I may avoid him. Which of these is he?
  Leon. Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast kill'd
    Mine innocent child?
  Leon. No, not so, villain! thou beliest thyself.
    Here stand a pair of honourable men--
    A third is fled--that had a hand in it.
    I thank you princes for my daughter's death.
    Record it with your high and worthy deeds.
    'Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.
  Leon. I cannot bid you bid my daughter live-
    That were impossible; but I pray you both,
    Possess the people in Messina here
    How innocent she died; and if your love
    Can labour aught in sad invention,
    Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb,
    And sing it to her bones--sing it to-night.
    To-morrow morning come you to my house,
    And since you could not be my son-in-law,
    Be yet my nephew. My brother hath a daughter,
    Almost the copy of my child that's dead,
    And she alone is heir to both of us.
    Give her the right you should have giv'n her cousin,
    And so dies my revenge.
  Leon. To-morrow then I will expect your coming;  
    To-night I take my leave. This naughty man
    Shall fact to face be brought to Margaret,
    Who I believe was pack'd in all this wrong,
    Hir'd to it by your brother.
  Leon. I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.
  Leon. There's for thy pains. [Gives money.]  
  Leon. Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.
  Leon. Until to-morrow morning, lords, farewell.
  Leon. [to the Watch] Bring you these fellows on.--We'll talk with
      Margaret,
    How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.
                                                         Exeunt.
Scene II.
Leonato's orchard.
Enter Benedick and Margaret [meeting].
  Leon. So are the Prince and Claudio, who accus'd her
    Upon the error that you heard debated.
    But Margaret was in some fault for this,
    Although against her will, as it appears
    In the true course of all the question.
  Leon. Well, daughter, and you gentlewomen all,
    Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves,
    And when I send for you, come hither mask'd.
                                                  Exeunt Ladies.
    The Prince and Claudio promis'd by this hour
    To visit me. You know your office, brother:
    You must be father to your brother's daughter,  
    And give her to young Claudio.
  Leon. That eye my daughter lent her. 'Tis most true.
  Leon. The sight whereof I think you had from me,
    From Claudio, and the Prince; but what's your will?
  Leon. My heart is with your liking.
  Leon. Good morrow, Prince; good morrow, Claudio.
    We here attend you. Are you yet determin'd
    To-day to marry with my brother's daughter?
  Leon. Call her forth, brother. Here's the friar ready.
                                                 [Exit Antonio.]
  Leon. No, that you shall not till you take her hand
    Before this friar and swear to marry her.
  Leon. She died, my lord, but whiles her slander liv'd.
  Leon. Come, cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.
  Leon. We'll have dancing afterward.
