  Marg. So would not I for your own sake, for I have many ill
    qualities.
  Marg. I say my prayers aloud.
  Marg. God match me with a good dancer!
  Marg. And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is done!
    Answer, clerk.
  Marg. I'll make her come, I warrant you, presently.    [Exit.]
  Marg. Troth, I think your other rebato were better.
  Marg. By my troth, 's not so good, and I warrant your cousin will
    say so.
  Marg. I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a
    thought browner; and your gown's a most rare fashion, i' faith.
    I saw the Duchess of Milan's gown that they praise so.
  Marg. By my troth, 's but a nightgown in respect of yours--
    cloth-o'-gold and cuts, and lac'd with silver, set with pearls
    down sleeves, side-sleeves, and skirts, round underborne with  
    a blush tinsel. But for a fine, quaint, graceful, and excellent
    fashion, yours is worth ten on't.
  Marg. 'Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man.
  Marg. Of what, lady? of speaking honourably? Is not marriage
    honourable in a beggar? Is not your lord honourable without
    marriage? I think you would have me say, 'saving your reverence,
    a husband.' An bad thinking do not wrest true speaking, I'll
    offend nobody. Is there any harm in 'the heavier for a husband'?
    None, I think, an it be the right husband and the right wife.
    Otherwise 'tis light, and not heavy. Ask my Lady Beatrice else.
    Here she comes.
                               Enter Beatrice.
  Marg. Clap's into 'Light o' love.' That goes without a burden. Do
    you sing it, and I'll dance it.
  Marg. O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels.
  Marg. For a hawk, a horse, or a husband?
  Marg. Well, an you be not turn'd Turk, there's no more sailing by
    the star.
  Marg. Nothing I; but God send every one their heart's desire!
  Marg. A maid, and stuff'd! There's goodly catching of cold.
  Marg. Ever since you left it. Doth not my wit become me rarely?  
  Marg. Get you some of this distill'd carduus benedictus and lay it
    to your heart. It is the only thing for a qualm.
  Marg. Moral? No, by my troth, I have no moral meaning; I meant
    plain holy thistle. You may think perchance that I think you are
    in love. Nay, by'r lady, I am not such a fool to think what I
    list; nor I list not to think what I can; nor indeed I cannot
    think, if I would think my heart out of thinking, that you are in
    love, or that you will be in love, or that you can be in love.
    Yet Benedick was such another, and now is he become a man. He
    swore he would never marry; and yet now in despite of his heart
    he eats his meat without grudging; and how you may be converted I
    know not, but methinks you look with your eyes as other women do.
  Marg. Not a false gallop.
  
                         Enter Ursula.
  Marg. Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?
  Marg. To have no man come over me? Why, shall I always keep below
    stairs?
  Marg. And yours as blunt as the fencer's foils, which hit but hurt
    not.
  Marg. Give us the swords; we have bucklers of our own.
  Marg. Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think hath legs.
