  FABIAN. Nay, I'll come; if I lose a scruple of this sport let me be
    boil'd to death with melancholy.
  FABIAN. I would exult, man; you know he brought me out o' favour
    with my lady about a bear-baiting here.
  FABIAN. O, peace! Contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock of him;
    how he jets under his advanc'd plumes!
  FABIAN. O, peace! Now he's deeply in; look how imagination blows
    him.
  FABIAN. O, peace, peace!
  FABIAN. O, peace, peace, peace! Now, now.  
  FABIAN. Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.
  FABIAN. Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.
  FABIAN. Now is the woodcock near the gin.
  FABIAN. This wins him, liver and all.
  FABIAN. A fustian riddle!
  FABIAN. What dish o' poison has she dress'd him!
  FABIAN. Sowter will cry upon't for all this, though it be as rank
    as a fox.
  FABIAN. Did not I say he would work it out?
    The cur is excellent at faults.
  FABIAN. And O shall end, I hope.
  FABIAN. Ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see more
    detraction at your heels than fortunes before you.
  FABIAN. I will not give my part of this sport for a pension of
    thousands to be paid from the Sophy.
  FABIAN. Here comes my noble gull-catcher.
  FABIAN. You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew.
  FABIAN. This was a great argument of love in her toward you.
  FABIAN. I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of judgment
    and reason.
  FABIAN. She did show favour to the youth in your sight only to
    exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valour, to put fire in
    your heart and brimstone in your liver. You should then have  
    accosted her; and with some excellent jests, fire-new from the
    mint, you should have bang'd the youth into dumbness. This was
    look'd for at your hand, and this was baulk'd. The double gilt of
    this opportunity you let time wash off, and you are now sail'd
    into the north of my lady's opinion; where you will hang like an
    icicle on Dutchman's beard, unless you do redeem it by some
    laudable attempt either of valour or policy.
  FABIAN. There is no way but this, Sir Andrew.
  FABIAN. This is a dear manakin to you, Sir Toby.
  FABIAN. We shall have a rare letter from him; but you'll not
    deliver't?
  FABIAN. And his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage no great
    presage of cruelty.
  
                         Enter MARIA
  FABIAN. Here he is, here he is. How is't with you, sir?
  FABIAN. Carry his water to th' wise woman.
  FABIAN. No way but gentleness- gently, gently. The fiend is rough,
    and will not be roughly us'd.
  FABIAN. If this were play'd upon a stage now, I could condemn it as
    an improbable fiction.
  FABIAN. Why, we shall make him mad indeed.
  FABIAN. More matter for a May morning.
  FABIAN. Is't so saucy?
  FABIAN. Good and valiant.
  FABIAN. A good note; that keeps you from the blow of the law.
  FABIAN. Very brief, and to exceeding good sense- less.
  FABIAN. Good.
  FABIAN. Still you keep o' th' windy side of the law. Good!  
  FABIAN. Here he comes with your niece; give them way till he take
    leave, and presently after him.
  FABIAN. I know the knight is incens'd against you, even to a mortal
    arbitrement; but nothing of the circumstance more.
  FABIAN. Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by his form,
    as you are like to find him in the proof of his valour. He is
    indeed, sir, the most skilful, bloody, and fatal opposite that
    you could possibly have found in any part of Illyria. Will you
    walk towards him? I will make your peace with him if I can.  
  FABIAN. [To SIR TOBY] He is as horribly conceited of him; and pants
   and looks pale, as if a bear were at his heels.
  FABIAN. Give ground if you see him furious.
  FABIAN. O good Sir Toby, hold! Here come the officers.
  FABIAN. A coward, a most devout coward, religious in it.
  FABIAN. Come, let's see the event.
  FABIAN. Now, as thou lov'st me, let me see his letter.
  FABIAN. Anything.
  FABIAN. This is to give a dog, and in recompense desire my dog
    again.
             Enter DUKE, VIOLA, CURIO, and LORDS
  FABIAN. [Reads] 'By the Lord, madam, you wrong me, and the world
    shall know it. Though you have put me into darkness and given
    your drunken cousin rule over me, yet have I the benefit of my
    senses as well as your ladyship. I have your own letter that
    induced me to the semblance I put on, with the which I doubt not
    but to do myself much right or you much shame. Think of me as you
    please. I leave my duty a little unthought of, and speak out of
    my injury.
                                        THE MADLY-US'D MALVOLIO'
  FABIAN. Good madam, hear me speak,
    And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come
    Taint the condition of this present hour,
    Which I have wond'red at. In hope it shall not,
    Most freely I confess myself and Toby
    Set this device against Malvolio here,
    Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts
    We had conceiv'd against him. Maria writ
    The letter, at Sir Toby's great importance,
    In recompense whereof he hath married her.
    How with a sportful malice it was follow'd  
    May rather pluck on laughter than revenge,
    If that the injuries be justly weigh'd
    That have on both sides pass'd.
