  SIR TOBY. What a plague means my niece to take the death of her
    brother thus? I am sure care's an enemy to life.
  SIR TOBY. Why, let her except before excepted.
  SIR TOBY. Confine! I'll confine myself no finer than I am. These
    clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these boots too;
    an they be not, let them hang themselves in their own straps.
  SIR TOBY. Who? Sir Andrew Aguecheek?
  SIR TOBY. He's as tall a man as any's in Illyria.
  SIR TOBY. Why, he has three thousand ducats a year.
  SIR TOBY. Fie that you'll say so! He plays o' th' viol-de-gamboys,
    and speaks three or four languages word for word without book,
    and hath all the good gifts of nature.
  SIR TOBY. By this hand, they are scoundrels and subtractors that
    say so of him. Who are they?
  SIR TOBY. With drinking healths to my niece; I'll drink to her as
    long as there is a passage in my throat and drink in Illyria.
    He's a coward and a coystrill that will not drink to my niece
    till his brains turn o' th' toe like a parish-top. What, wench!
    Castiliano vulgo! for here comes Sir Andrew Agueface.
                    Enter SIR ANDREW AGUECHEEK  
  SIR TOBY. Sweet Sir Andrew!
  SIR TOBY. Accost, Sir Andrew, accost.
  SIR TOBY. My niece's chambermaid.
  SIR TOBY. An thou let part so, Sir Andrew, would thou mightst never
    draw sword again!
  SIR TOBY. O knight, thou lack'st a cup of canary! When did I see
    thee so put down?
  SIR TOBY. No question.
  SIR TOBY. Pourquoi, my dear knight?
  SIR TOBY. Then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair.
  SIR TOBY. Past question; for thou seest it will not curl by nature.
  SIR TOBY. Excellent; it hangs like flax on a distaff, and I hope to
    see a huswife take thee between her legs and spin it off.
  SIR TOBY. She'll none o' th' Count; she'll not match above her
    degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit; I have heard her
    swear't. Tut, there's life in't, man.
  SIR TOBY. Art thou good at these kickshawses, knight?
  SIR TOBY. What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?
  SIR TOBY. And I can cut the mutton to't.
  SIR TOBY. Wherefore are these things hid? Wherefore have these
    gifts a curtain before 'em? Are they like to take dust, like
    Mistress Mall's picture? Why dost thou not go to church in a
    galliard and come home in a coranto? My very walk should be a
    jig; I would not so much as make water but in a sink-a-pace. What
    dost thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues in? I did think, by
    the excellent constitution of thy leg, it was form'd under the
    star of a galliard.
  SIR TOBY. What shall we do else? Were we not born under Taurus?
  SIR TOBY. No, sir; it is legs and thighs. Let me see the caper. Ha,
    higher! Ha, ha, excellent!                            Exeunt
SCENE IV.
The DUKE'S palace
Enter VALENTINE, and VIOLA in man's attire
  SIR TOBY. A gentleman.
  SIR TOBY. 'Tis a gentleman here. [Hiccups] A plague o' these
    pickle-herring! How now, sot!
  SIR TOBY. Lechery! I defy lechery. There's one at the gate.
  SIR TOBY. Let him be the devil an he will, I care not; give me
    faith, say I. Well, it's all one.                       Exit
  SIR TOBY. Approach, Sir Andrew. Not to be abed after midnight is to
    be up betimes; and 'diluculo surgere' thou know'st-
  SIR TOBY. A false conclusion! I hate it as an unfill'd can. To be
    up after midnight and to go to bed then is early; so that to go
    to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes. Does not our lives
    consist of the four elements?
  SIR TOBY. Th'art a scholar; let us therefore eat and drink.
    Marian, I say! a stoup of wine.
                          Enter CLOWN
  SIR TOBY. Welcome, ass. Now let's have a catch.
  SIR TOBY. Come on, there is sixpence for you. Let's have a song.
  SIR TOBY. A love-song, a love-song.
  SIR TOBY. Good, good!
                         CLOWN sings
           What is love? 'Tis not hereafter;
           Present mirth hath present laughter;
             What's to come is still unsure.
           In delay there lies no plenty,
           Then come kiss me, sweet and twenty;
             Youth's a stuff will not endure.
  SIR TOBY. A contagious breath.
  SIR TOBY. To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion. But shall
    we make the welkin dance indeed? Shall we rouse the night-owl in
    a catch that will draw three souls out of one weaver? Shall we do
    that?
  SIR TOBY. My lady's a Cataian, we are politicians, Malvolio's a
    Peg-a-Ramsey, and                                    [Sings]
                  Three merry men be we.
    Am not I consanguineous? Am I not of her blood? Tilly-vally,
    lady.                                                [Sings]
              There dwelt a man in Babylon,
              Lady, lady.
  SIR TOBY. [Sings] O' the twelfth day of December-
  SIR TOBY. We did keep time, sir, in our catches. Sneck up!
  SIR TOBY. [Sings] Farewell, dear heart, since I must needs be gone.
  SIR TOBY. [Sings] But I will never die.           [Falls down]
  SIR TOBY. [Sings] Shall I bid him go?
  SIR TOBY. [Sings] Shall I bid him go, and spare not?
  SIR TOBY. [Rising] Out o' tune, sir! Ye lie. Art any more than a
    steward? Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shall
    be no more cakes and ale?
  SIR TOBY. Do't, knight. I'll write thee a challenge; or I'll
    deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.
  SIR TOBY. Possess us, possess us; tell us something of him.
  SIR TOBY. What, for being a Puritan? Thy exquisite reason, dear
    knight?
  SIR TOBY. What wilt thou do?
  SIR TOBY. Excellent! I smell a device.
  SIR TOBY. He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop, that
    they come from my niece, and that she's in love with him.
  SIR TOBY. Good night, Penthesilea.
  SIR TOBY. She's a beagle true-bred, and one that adores me.
    What o' that?
  SIR TOBY. Let's to bed, knight. Thou hadst need send for more
    money.
  SIR TOBY. Send for money, knight; if thou hast her not i' th' end,
    call me Cut.
  SIR TOBY. Come, come, I'll go burn some sack; 'tis too late to go
    to bed now. Come, knight; come, knight.
                                                          Exeunt
SCENE IV.
The DUKE'S palace
Enter DUKE, VIOLA, CURIO, and OTHERS
  SIR TOBY. Come thy ways, Signior Fabian.
  SIR TOBY. Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascally
    sheep-biter come by some notable shame?
  SIR TOBY. To anger him we'll have the bear again; and we will fool
    him black and blue- shall we not, Sir Andrew?
  SIR TOBY. Here comes the little villain.
    How now, my metal of India!
  SIR TOBY. Here's an overweening rogue!
  SIR TOBY. Peace, I say.
  SIR TOBY. Ah, rogue!
  SIR TOBY. Peace, peace!
  SIR TOBY. O, for a stone-bow to hit him in the eye!
  SIR TOBY. Fire and brimstone!
  SIR TOBY. Bolts and shackles!
  SIR TOBY. Shall this fellow live?
  SIR TOBY. And does not Toby take you a blow o' the lips then?
  SIR TOBY. What, what?
  SIR TOBY. Out, scab!
  SIR TOBY. O, peace! And the spirit of humours intimate reading
    aloud to him!
  SIR TOBY. Marry, hang thee, brock!
  SIR TOBY. Excellent wench, say I.
  SIR TOBY. And with what wing the staniel checks at it!
  SIR TOBY. O, ay, make up that! He is now at a cold scent.
  SIR TOBY. Ay, or I'll cudgel him, and make him cry 'O!'
  SIR TOBY. I could marry this wench for this device.
  SIR TOBY. And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.
  
                          Enter MARIA
  SIR TOBY. Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck?
  SIR TOBY. Shall I play my freedom at tray-trip, and become thy
    bond-slave?
  SIR TOBY. Why, thou hast put him in such a dream that when the
    image of it leaves him he must run mad.
  SIR TOBY. Like aqua-vita! with a midwife.
  SIR TOBY. To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!
  SIR TOBY. Save you, gentleman!
  SIR TOBY. Will you encounter the house? My niece is desirous you
    should enter, if your trade be to her.
  SIR TOBY. Taste your legs, sir; put them to motion.
  SIR TOBY. I mean, to go, sir, to enter.
  SIR TOBY. Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.
  SIR TOBY. Did she see thee the while, old boy? Tell me that.
  SIR TOBY. And they have been grand-jurymen since before Noah was a
    sailor.
  SIR TOBY. Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of
    valour. Challenge me the Count's youth to fight with him; hurt
    him in eleven places. My niece shall take note of it; and assure
    thyself there is no love-broker in the world can more prevail in
    man's commendation with woman than report of valour.
  SIR TOBY. Go, write it in a martial hand; be curst and brief; it is
    no matter how witty, so it be eloquent and full of invention.
    Taunt him with the license of ink; if thou thou'st him some
    thrice, it shall not be amiss; and as many lies as will lie in  
    thy sheet of paper, although the sheet were big enough for the
    bed of Ware in England, set 'em down; go about it. Let there be
    gall enough in thy ink, though thou write with a goose-pen, no
    matter. About it.
  SIR TOBY. We'll call thee at the cubiculo. Go.
                                                 Exit SIR ANDREW
  SIR TOBY. I have been dear to him, lad- some two thousand strong,
    or so.
  SIR TOBY. Never trust me then; and by all means stir on the youth
    to an answer. I think oxen and wainropes cannot hale them
    together. For Andrew, if he were open'd and you find so much
    blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea, I'll eat the
    rest of th' anatomy.
  SIR TOBY. Look where the youngest wren of nine comes.
  SIR TOBY. And cross-garter'd?
  SIR TOBY. Come, bring us, bring us where he is.         Exeunt
SCENE III.
A street
Enter SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO
  SIR TOBY. Which way is he, in the name of sanctity? If all the
    devils of hell be drawn in little, and Legion himself possess'd
    him, yet I'll speak to him.
  SIR TOBY. How is't with you, man?
  SIR TOBY. Go to, go to; peace, peace; we must deal gently with him.
    Let me alone. How do you, Malvolio? How is't with you? What, man,
    defy the devil; consider, he's an enemy to mankind.  
  SIR TOBY. Prithee hold thy peace; this is not the way. Do you not
    see you move him? Let me alone with him.
  SIR TOBY. Why, how now, my bawcock!
    How dost thou, chuck?
  SIR TOBY. Ay, Biddy, come with me. What, man, 'tis not for gravity
    to play at cherrypit with Satan. Hang him, foul collier!
  SIR TOBY. Is't possible?
  SIR TOBY. His very genius hath taken the infection of the device,
    man.
  SIR TOBY. Come, we'll have him in a dark room and bound. My niece
    is already in the belief that he's mad. We may carry it thus, for
    our pleasure and his penance, till our very pastime, tired out of
    breath, prompt us to have mercy on him; at which time we will
    bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of
    madmen. But see, but see.
                     Enter SIR ANDREW
  
  SIR TOBY. Give me. [Reads] 'Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art
    but a scurvy fellow.'
  SIR TOBY. [Reads] 'Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind, why I do
    call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for't.'
  SIR TOBY. [Reads] 'Thou com'st to the Lady Olivia, and in my sight
    she uses thee kindly; but thou liest in thy throat; that is not
    the matter I challenge thee for.'
  SIR TOBY. [Reads] 'I will waylay thee going home; where if it be
    thy chance to kill me'-
  SIR TOBY. 'Thou kill'st me like a rogue and a villain.'
  SIR TOBY. [Reads] 'Fare thee well; and God have mercy upon one of
    our souls! He may have mercy upon mine; but my hope is better,
    and so look to thyself. Thy friend, as thou usest him, and thy
    sworn enemy,
                                              ANDREW AGUECHEEK.'
    If this letter move him not, his legs cannot. I'll give't him.
  SIR TOBY. Go, Sir Andrew; scout me for him at the corner of the
    orchard, like a bum-baily; so soon as ever thou seest him, draw;
    and as thou draw'st, swear horrible; for it comes to pass oft
    that a terrible oath, with a swaggering accent sharply twang'd
    off, gives manhood more approbation than ever proof itself would
    have earn'd him. Away.
  SIR TOBY. Now will not I deliver his letter; for the behaviour of
    the young gentleman gives him out to be of good capacity and
    breeding; his employment between his lord and my niece confirms
    no less. Therefore this letter, being so excellently ignorant,  
    will breed no terror in the youth: he will find it comes from a
    clodpole. But, sir, I will deliver his challenge by word of
    mouth, set upon Aguecheek notable report of valour, and drive the
    gentleman- as know his youth will aptly receive it- into a most
    hideous opinion of his rage, skill, fury, and impetuosity. This
    will so fright them both that they will kill one another by the
    look, like cockatrices.
                Re-enter OLIVIA. With VIOLA
  SIR TOBY. I will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a
    challenge.
                              Exeunt SIR TOBY, FABIAN, and MARIA
  SIR TOBY. Gentleman, God save thee.
  SIR TOBY. That defence thou hast, betake thee tot. Of what nature
    the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know not; but thy  
    intercepter, full of despite, bloody as the hunter, attends
    thee at the orchard end. Dismount thy tuck, be yare in thy
    preparation, for thy assailant is quick, skilful, and deadly.
  SIR TOBY. You'll find it otherwise, I assure you; therefore, if you
    hold your life at any price, betake you to your guard; for your
    opposite hath in him what youth, strength, skill, and wrath, can
    furnish man withal.
  SIR TOBY. He is knight, dubb'd with unhatch'd rapier and on carpet
    consideration; but he is a devil in private brawl. Souls and
    bodies hath he divorc'd three; and his incensement at this moment
    is so implacable that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of
    death and sepulchre. Hob-nob is his word- give't or take't.
  SIR TOBY. Sir, no; his indignation derives itself out of a very
    competent injury; therefore, get you on and give him his desire.
    Back you shall not to the house, unless you undertake that with
    me which with as much safety you might answer him; therefore on,
    or strip your sword stark naked; for meddle you must, that's
    certain, or forswear to wear iron about you.
  SIR TOBY. I Will do so. Signior Fabian, stay you by this gentleman
    till my return.                                Exit SIR TOBY
  SIR TOBY. Why, man, he's a very devil; I have not seen such a
    firago. I had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard, and all, and he
    gives me the stuck in with such a mortal motion that it is
    inevitable; and on the answer, he pays you as surely as your feet
    hit the ground they step on. They say he has been fencer to the
    Sophy.
  SIR TOBY. Ay, but he will not now be pacified; Fabian can scarce
    hold him yonder.
  SIR TOBY. I'll make the motion. Stand here, make a good show on't;  
    this shall end without the perdition of souls. [Aside] Marry,
    I'll ride your horse as well as I ride you.
              Re-enter FABIAN and VIOLA
    [To FABIAN] I have his horse to take up the quarrel; I have
    persuaded him the youth's a devil.
  SIR TOBY. [To VIOLA] There's no remedy, sir: he will fight with you
    for's oath sake. Marry, he hath better bethought him of his
    quarrel, and he finds that now scarce to be worth talking of.
    Therefore draw for the supportance of his vow; he protests he
    will not hurt you.
  SIR TOBY. Come, Sir Andrew, there's no remedy; the gentleman will,
    for his honour's sake, have one bout with you; he cannot by the
    duello avoid it; but he has promis'd me, as he is a gentleman and  
    a soldier, he will not hurt you. Come on; to't.
  SIR TOBY. You, sir! Why, what are you?
  SIR TOBY. Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.
                                                     [They draw]
                         Enter OFFICERS
  SIR TOBY. [To ANTONIO] I'll be with you anon.
  SIR TOBY. Come hither, knight; come hither, Fabian; we'll whisper
    o'er a couplet or two of most sage saws.  
  SIR TOBY. A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than a
    hare. His dishonesty appears in leaving his friend here in
    necessity and denying him; and for his cowardship, ask Fabian.
  SIR TOBY. Do; cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword.
  SIR TOBY. I dare lay any money 'twill be nothing yet.
                                                          Exeunt
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Before OLIVIA'S house
Enter SEBASTIAN and CLOWN
  SIR TOBY. Hold, sir, or I'll throw your dagger o'er the house.
                                             [Holding SEBASTIAN]
  SIR TOBY. Come on, sir; hold.
  SIR TOBY. Come, sir, I will not let you go. Come, my young soldier,
    put up your iron; you are well flesh'd. Come on.
  SIR TOBY. What, what? Nay, then I must have an ounce or two of this
    malapert blood from you. [Draws]
                        Enter OLIVIA
  SIR TOBY. Madam!
  SIR TOBY. Jove bless thee, Master Parson.
  SIR TOBY. To him, Sir Topas.
  SIR TOBY. The knave counterfeits well; a good knave.
  SIR TOBY. Well said, Master Parson.
  SIR TOBY. My most exquisite Sir Topas!
  SIR TOBY. To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how thou
    find'st him. I would we were well rid of this knavery. If he may
    be conveniently deliver'd, I would he were; for I am now so far
    in offence with my niece that I cannot pursue with any safety
    this sport to the upshot. Come by and by to my chamber.
                                                 Exit with MARIA
  SIR TOBY. That's all one; has hurt me, and there's th' end on't.
    Sot, didst see Dick Surgeon, sot?
  SIR TOBY. Then he's a rogue and a passy measures pavin. I hate a
    drunken rogue.  
  SIR TOBY. Will you help- an ass-head and a coxcomb and a knave, a
    thin fac'd knave, a gull?
