  NYM. Good morrow, Lieutenant Bardolph.
  NYM. For my part, I care not; I say little, but when time shall
    serve, there shall be smiles- but that shall be as it may. I dare
    not fight; but I will wink and hold out mine iron. It is a simple
    one; but what though? It will toast cheese, and it will endure
    cold as another man's sword will; and there's an end.
  NYM. Faith, I will live so long as I may, that's the certain of it;
    and when I cannot live any longer, I will do as I may. That is my
    rest, that is the rendezvous of it.
  NYM. I cannot tell; things must be as they may. Men may sleep, and
    they may have their throats about them at that time; and some say
    knives have edges. It must be as it may; though patience be a
    tired mare, yet she will plod. There must be conclusions. Well, I
    cannot tell.
                     Enter PISTOL and HOSTESS
  NYM. How now, mine host Pistol!
  NYM. Pish!  
  NYM. Will you shog off? I would have you solus.
  NYM. I am not Barbason: you cannot conjure me. I have an humour to
    knock you indifferently well. If you grow foul with me, Pistol, I
    will scour you with my rapier, as I may, in fair terms; if you
    would walk off I would prick your guts a little, in good terms,
    as I may, and thaes the humour of it.
  NYM. I will cut thy throat one time or other, in fair terms; that
    is the humour of it.
  NYM. You'll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at betting?
  NYM. That now I will have; that's the humour of it.
  NYM. I shall have my eight shillings I won of you at betting?
  NYM. [Sheathing his sword] I shall have my noble?
  NYM. [Shaking hands] Well, then, that's the humour of't.
                       Re-enter HOSTESS
  NYM. The King hath run bad humours on the knight; that's the even
    of it.
  NYM. The King is a good king, but it must be as it may; he passes
    some humours and careers.
  NYM. They say he cried out of sack.
  NYM. Shall we shog? The King will be gone from Southampton.
  NYM. I cannot kiss, that is the humour of it; but adieu.
  NYM. Pray thee, Corporal, stay; the knocks are too hot, and for
    mine own part I have not a case of lives. The humour of it is too
    hot; that is the very plain-song of it.
  NYM. These be good humours. Your honour wins bad humours.
                                              Exeunt all but BOY
