  Reg. Sir, I am made
     Of the selfsame metal that my sister is,
     And prize me at her worth. In my true heart
     I find she names my very deed of love;
     Only she comes too short, that I profess
     Myself an enemy to all other joys
     Which the most precious square of sense possesses,
     And find I am alone felicitate
     In your dear Highness' love.  
  Reg. Let your study
     Be to content your lord, who hath receiv'd you
     At fortune's alms. You have obedience scanted,
     And well are worth the want that you have wanted.
  Reg. That's most certain, and with you; next month with us.
  Reg. 'Tis the infirmity of his age; yet he hath ever but slenderly
     known himself.
  Reg. Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this
     of Kent's banishment.
  Reg. We shall further think on't.
  Reg. If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
     Which can pursue th' offender. How dost, my lord?
  Reg. What, did my father's godson seek your life?
     He whom my father nam'd? Your Edgar?
  Reg. Was he not companion with the riotous knights
     That tend upon my father?
  Reg. No marvel then though he were ill affected.
     'Tis they have put him on the old man's death,
     To have th' expense and waste of his revenues.  
     I have this present evening from my sister
     Been well inform'd of them, and with such cautions
     That, if they come to sojourn at my house,
     I'll not be there.
  Reg. Thus out of season, threading dark-ey'd night.
     Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
     Wherein we must have use of your advice.
     Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
     Of differences, which I best thought it fit
     To answer from our home. The several messengers
     From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
     Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow
     Your needful counsel to our business,
     Which craves the instant use.
  Reg. The messengers from our sister and the King
  Reg. Till noon? Till night, my lord, and all night too!
  Reg. Sir, being his knave, I will.
  Reg. My sister may receive it much more worse,
     To have her gentleman abus'd, assaulted,
     For following her affairs. Put in his legs.-
                                    [Kent is put in the stocks.]
     Come, my good lord, away.
                           Exeunt [all but Gloucester and Kent].
  Reg. I am glad to see your Highness.
  Reg. I pray you, sir, take patience. I have hope
     You less know how to value her desert
     Than she to scant her duty.
  Reg. I cannot think my sister in the least
     Would fail her obligation. If, sir, perchance
     She have restrain'd the riots of your followers,  
     'Tis on such ground, and to such wholesome end,
     As clears her from all blame.
  Reg. O, sir, you are old!
     Nature in you stands on the very verge
     Of her confine. You should be rul'd, and led
     By some discretion that discerns your state
     Better than you yourself. Therefore I pray you
     That to our sister you do make return;
     Say you have wrong'd her, sir.
  Reg. Good sir, no more! These are unsightly tricks.
     Return you to my sister.
  Reg. O the blest gods! so will you wish on me
     When the rash mood is on.
  Reg. Good sir, to th' purpose.
                                                  Tucket within.
  Reg. I know't- my sister's. This approves her letter,
     That she would soon be here.
                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
     Is your lady come?
  Reg. I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
     If, till the expiration of your month,
     You will return and sojourn with my sister,
     Dismissing half your train, come then to me.
     I am now from home, and out of that provision  
     Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
  Reg. Not altogether so.
     I look'd not for you yet, nor am provided
     For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;
     For those that mingle reason with your passion
     Must be content to think you old, and so-
     But she knows what she does.
  Reg. I dare avouch it, sir. What, fifty followers?
     Is it not well? What should you need of more?
     Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger
     Speak 'gainst so great a number? How in one house
     Should many people, under two commands,
     Hold amity? 'Tis hard; almost impossible.  
  Reg. Why not, my lord? If then they chanc'd to slack ye,
     We could control them. If you will come to me
     (For now I spy a danger), I entreat you
     To bring but five-and-twenty. To no more
     Will I give place or notice.
  Reg. And in good time you gave it!
  Reg. And speak't again my lord. No more with me.
  Reg. What need one?
  Reg. This house is little; the old man and 's people
     Cannot be well bestow'd.
  Reg. For his particular, I'll receive him gladly,
     But not one follower.
  Reg. O, sir, to wilful men
     The injuries that they themselves procure
     Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors.
     He is attended with a desperate train,
     And what they may incense him to, being apt
     To have his ear abus'd, wisdom bids fear.
  Reg. Hang him instantly.
  Reg. Ingrateful fox! 'tis he.
  Reg. Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!
  Reg. So white, and such a traitor!
  Reg. Be simple-answer'd, for we know the truth.
  Reg. To whose hands have you sent the lunatic King?
     Speak.
  Reg. And false.
  Reg. Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charg'd at peril-
  Reg. Wherefore to Dover, sir?
  Reg. One side will mock another. Th' other too!
  Reg. How now, you dog?
  1. Serv. If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
     I'ld shake it on this quarrel.  
  Reg. What do you mean?
  Reg. What do you mean?
  Reg. Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus?
                        She takes a sword and runs at him behind.
  1. Serv. O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left
     To see some mischief on him. O!                     He dies.
  Reg. Out, treacherous villain!
     Thou call'st on him that hates thee. It was he
     That made the overture of thy treasons to us;
     Who is too good to pity thee.
  Reg. Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
     His way to Dover.  
                                     Exit [one] with Gloucester.
     How is't, my lord? How look you?
  Reg. But are my brother's pow'rs set forth?
  Reg. Himself in person there?
  Reg. Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?
  Reg. What might import my sister's letter to him?
  Reg. Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
     It was great ignorance, Gloucester's eyes being out,
     To let him live. Where he arrives he moves
     All hearts against us. Edmund, I think, is gone,
     In pity of his misery, to dispatch
     His nighted life; moreover, to descry
     The strength o' th' enemy.
  Reg. Our troops set forth to-morrow. Stay with us.
     The ways are dangerous.
  Reg. Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you
     Transport her purposes by word? Belike,
     Something- I know not what- I'll love thee much-
     Let me unseal the letter.
  Reg. I know your lady does not love her husband;
     I am sure of that; and at her late being here
     She gave strange eliads and most speaking looks
     To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
  Reg. I speak in understanding. Y'are! I know't.
     Therefore I do advise you take this note.
     My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talk'd,
     And more convenient is he for my hand
     Than for your lady's. You may gather more.
     If you do find him, pray you give him this;  
     And when your mistress hears thus much from you,
     I pray desire her call her wisdom to her.
     So farewell.
     If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
     Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
  Reg. Fare thee well.                                   Exeunt.
Scene VI.
The country near Dover.
Enter Gloucester, and Edgar [like a Peasant].
  Reg. Our sister's man is certainly miscarried.
  Reg. Now, sweet lord,
     You know the goodness I intend upon you.
     Tell me- but truly- but then speak the truth-
     Do you not love my sister?
  Reg. But have you never found my brother's way
     To the forfended place?
  Reg. I am doubtful that you have been conjunct  
     And bosom'd with her, as far as we call hers.
  Reg. I never shall endure her. Dear my lord,
     Be not familiar with her.
  Reg. Why is this reason'd?
  Reg. Sister, you'll go with us?
  Reg. 'Tis most convenient. Pray you go with us.
  Reg. That's as we list to grace him.
     Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded
     Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers,
     Bore the commission of my place and person,
     The which immediacy may well stand up
     And call itself your brother.  
  Reg. In my rights
     By me invested, he compeers the best.
  Reg. Jesters do oft prove prophets.
  Reg. Lady, I am not well; else I should answer
     From a full-flowing stomach. General,
     Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;
     Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine.
     Witness the world that I create thee here
     My lord and master.
  Reg. [to Edmund] Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.  
  Reg. Sick, O, sick!
  Reg. My sickness grows upon me.
