  AENEAS. How now, Prince Troilus! Wherefore not afield?
  AENEAS. That Paris is returned home, and hurt.
  AENEAS. Troilus, by Menelaus.
  AENEAS. Hark what good sport is out of town to-day!
  AENEAS. In all swift haste.
  AENEAS. Is this great Agamemnon's tent, I pray you?
  AENEAS. May one that is a herald and a prince
    Do a fair message to his kingly eyes?
  AENEAS. Fair leave and large security. How may
    A stranger to those most imperial looks
    Know them from eyes of other mortals?
  AENEAS. Ay;
    I ask, that I might waken reverence,
    And bid the cheek be ready with a blush
    Modest as Morning when she coldly eyes
    The youthful Phoebus.
    Which is that god in office, guiding men?  
    Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?
  AENEAS. Courtiers as free, as debonair, unarm'd,
    As bending angels; that's their fame in peace.
    But when they would seem soldiers, they have galls,
    Good arms, strong joints, true swords; and, Jove's accord,
    Nothing so full of heart. But peace, Aeneas,
    Peace, Troyan; lay thy finger on thy lips.
    The worthiness of praise distains his worth,
    If that the prais'd himself bring the praise forth;
    But what the repining enemy commends,
    That breath fame blows; that praise, sole pure, transcends.
  AENEAS. Ay, Greek, that is my name.
  AENEAS. Sir, pardon; 'tis for Agamemnon's ears.
  AENEAS. Nor I from Troy come not to whisper with him;
    I bring a trumpet to awake his ear,  
    To set his sense on the attentive bent,
    And then to speak.
  AENEAS. Trumpet, blow loud,
    Send thy brass voice through all these lazy tents;
    And every Greek of mettle, let him know
    What Troy means fairly shall be spoke aloud.
                                                      [Sound trumpet]
    We have, great Agamemnon, here in Troy
    A prince called Hector-Priam is his father-
    Who in this dull and long-continued truce
    Is resty grown; he bade me take a trumpet
    And to this purpose speak: Kings, princes, lords!
    If there be one among the fair'st of Greece
    That holds his honour higher than his ease,
    That seeks his praise more than he fears his peril,
    That knows his valour and knows not his fear,  
    That loves his mistress more than in confession
    With truant vows to her own lips he loves,
    And dare avow her beauty and her worth
    In other arms than hers-to him this challenge.
    Hector, in view of Troyans and of Greeks,
    Shall make it good or do his best to do it:
    He hath a lady wiser, fairer, truer,
    Than ever Greek did couple in his arms;
    And will to-morrow with his trumpet call
    Mid-way between your tents and walls of Troy
    To rouse a Grecian that is true in love.
    If any come, Hector shall honour him;
    If none, he'll say in Troy, when he retires,
    The Grecian dames are sunburnt and not worth
    The splinter of a lance. Even so much.
  AENEAS. Now heavens forfend such scarcity of youth!
  AENEAS. Is the Prince there in person?
    Had I so good occasion to lie long
    As you, Prince Paris, nothing but heavenly business
    Should rob my bed-mate of my company.
  AENEAS. Health to you, valiant sir,
    During all question of the gentle truce;
    But when I meet you arm'd, as black defiance
    As heart can think or courage execute.  
  AENEAS. And thou shalt hunt a lion, that will fly
    With his face backward. In humane gentleness,
    Welcome to Troy! now, by Anchises' life,
    Welcome indeed! By Venus' hand I swear
    No man alive can love in such a sort
    The thing he means to kill, more excellently.
  AENEAS. We know each other well.
  AENEAS. I was sent for to the King; but why, I know not.
  AENEAS. That I assure you:
    Troilus had rather Troy were borne to Greece
    Than Cressid borne from Troy.
  AENEAS. Good morrow, all.                         Exit with servant
  AENEAS. Good morrow, lord, good morrow.
  AENEAS. Is not Prince Troilus here?
  AENEAS. Come, he is here, my lord; do not deny him.
    It doth import him much to speak with me.
  AENEAS. Who!-nay, then. Come, come, you'll do him wrong ere you are
    ware; you'll be so true to him to be false to him. Do not you
    know of him, but yet go fetch him hither; go.
                       Re-enter TROILUS
  AENEAS. My lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you,
    My matter is so rash. There is at hand
    Paris your brother, and Deiphobus,
    The Grecian Diomed, and our Antenor  
    Deliver'd to us; and for him forthwith,
    Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
    We must give up to Diomedes' hand
    The Lady Cressida.
  AENEAS. By Priam, and the general state of Troy.
    They are at hand and ready to effect it.
  AENEAS. Good, good, my lord, the secrets of neighbour Pandar
    Have not more gift in taciturnity.
                                            Exeunt TROILUS and AENEAS
  AENEAS. [Within] My lord, is the lady ready?
  AENEAS. [Within] Nay, good my lord!
  AENEAS. How have we spent this morning!  
    The Prince must think me tardy and remiss,
    That swore to ride before him to the field.
  AENEAS. Yea, with a bridegroom's fresh alacrity
    Let us address to tend on Hector's heels.
    The glory of our Troy doth this day lie
    On his fair worth and single chivalry.                     Exeunt
ACT IV. SCENE 5.
The Grecian camp. Lists set out
Enter AJAX, armed; AGAMEMNON, ACHILLES, PATROCLUS, MENELAUS, ULYSSES,
NESTOR, and others
  AENEAS. Hail, all the state of Greece! What shall be done
    To him that victory commands? Or do you purpose
    A victor shall be known? Will you the knights
    Shall to the edge of all extremity
    Pursue each other, or shall they be divided
    By any voice or order of the field?
    Hector bade ask.
  AENEAS. He cares not; he'll obey conditions.
  AENEAS. If not Achilles, sir,  
    What is your name?
  AENEAS. Therefore Achilles. But whate'er, know this:
    In the extremity of great and little
    Valour and pride excel themselves in Hector;
    The one almost as infinite as all,
    The other blank as nothing. Weigh him well,
    And that which looks like pride is courtesy.
    This Ajax is half made of Hector's blood;
    In love whereof half Hector stays at home;
    Half heart, half hand, half Hector comes to seek
    This blended knight, half Troyan and half Greek.
  AENEAS. Princes, enough, so please you.
  AENEAS. There is expectance here from both the sides
    What further you will do.
  AENEAS. The noble Menelaus.
  AENEAS. 'Tis the old Nestor.
  AENEAS. I have been seeking you this hour, my lord.  
    Hector, by this, is arming him in Troy;
    Ajax, your guard, stays to conduct you home.
  AENEAS. Stand, ho! yet are we masters of the field.
    Never go home; here starve we out the night.
                         Enter TROILUS
  AENEAS. My lord, you do discomfort all the host.
