  PANDARUS. Will this gear ne'er be mended?
  PANDARUS. Well, I have told you enough of this; for my part,
    I'll not meddle nor make no farther. He that will have a cake
    out of the wheat must needs tarry the grinding.
  PANDARUS. Ay, the grinding; but you must tarry the bolting.  
  PANDARUS. Ay, the bolting; but you must tarry the leavening.
  PANDARUS. Ay, to the leavening; but here's yet in the word
    'hereafter' the kneading, the making of the cake, the heating
    of the oven, and the baking; nay, you must stay the cooling too,
    or you may chance to burn your lips.
  PANDARUS. Well, she look'd yesternight fairer than ever I saw her
    look, or any woman else.
  PANDARUS. An her hair were not somewhat darker than Helen's- well,
    go to- there were no more comparison between the women. But, for
    my part, she is my kinswoman; I would not, as they term it,
    praise her, but I would somebody had heard her talk yesterday, as
    I did. I  will not dispraise your sister Cassandra's wit; but-
  PANDARUS. I speak no more than truth.
  PANDARUS. Faith, I'll not meddle in it. Let her be as she is: if
    she be fair, 'tis the better for her; an she be not, she has the
    mends in her own hands.
  PANDARUS. I have had my labour for my travail, ill thought on of
    her and ill thought on of you; gone between and between, but
    small thanks for my labour.
  PANDARUS. Because she's kin to me, therefore she's not so fair as
    Helen. An she were not kin to me, she would be as fair a Friday
    as Helen is on Sunday. But what care I? I care not an she were a
    blackamoor; 'tis all one to me.
  PANDARUS. I do not care whether you do or no. She's a fool to stay
    behind her father. Let her to the Greeks; and so I'll tell her
    the next time I see her. For my part, I'll meddle nor make no  
    more i' th' matter.
  PANDARUS. Not I.
  PANDARUS. Pray you, speak no more to me: I will leave all
    as I found it, and there an end.               Exit. Sound alarum
  PANDARUS. What's that? What's that?
  PANDARUS. Good morrow, cousin Cressid. What do you talk of?- Good
    morrow, Alexander.-How do you, cousin? When were you at Ilium?
  PANDARUS. What were you talking of when I came? Was Hector arm'd
    and gone ere you came to Ilium? Helen was not up, was she?
  PANDARUS. E'en so. Hector was stirring early.
  PANDARUS. Was he angry?
  PANDARUS. True, he was so; I know the cause too; he'll lay about  
    him today, I can tell them that. And there's Troilus will not
    come far behind him; let them take heed of Troilus, I can tell
    them that too.
  PANDARUS. Who, Troilus? Troilus is the better man of the two.
  PANDARUS. What, not between Troilus and Hector? Do you know a man
    if you see him?
  PANDARUS. Well, I say Troilus is Troilus.
  PANDARUS. No, nor Hector is not Troilus in some degrees.
  PANDARUS. Himself! Alas, poor Troilus! I would he were!
  PANDARUS. Condition I had gone barefoot to India.
  PANDARUS. Himself! no, he's not himself. Would 'a were himself!
    Well, the gods are above; time must friend or end. Well, Troilus,
    well! I would my heart were in her body! No, Hector is not a  
    better man than Troilus.
  PANDARUS. He is elder.
  PANDARUS. Th' other's not come to't; you shall tell me another tale
    when th' other's come to't. Hector shall not have his wit this
    year.
  PANDARUS. Nor his qualities.
  PANDARUS. Nor his beauty.
  PANDARUS. YOU have no judgment, niece. Helen herself swore th'
    other day that Troilus, for a brown favour, for so 'tis, I must
    confess- not brown neither-
  PANDARUS. Faith, to say truth, brown and not brown.
  PANDARUS. She prais'd his complexion above Paris.
  PANDARUS. So he has.
  PANDARUS. I swear to you I think Helen loves him better than Paris.
  PANDARUS. Nay, I am sure she does. She came to him th' other day
    into the compass'd window-and you know he has not past three or
    four hairs on his chin-
  PANDARUS. Why, he is very young, and yet will he within three pound
    lift as much as his brother Hector.
  PANDARUS. But to prove to you that Helen loves him: she came and
    puts me her white hand to his cloven chin-
  PANDARUS. Why, you know, 'tis dimpled. I think his smiling becomes  
    him better than any man in all Phrygia.
  PANDARUS. Does he not?
  PANDARUS. Why, go to, then! But to prove to you that Helen loves
    Troilus-
  PANDARUS. Troilus! Why, he esteems her no more than I esteem an
    addle egg.
  PANDARUS. I cannot choose but laugh to think how she tickled his
    chin. Indeed, she has a marvell's white hand, I must needs
    confess.
  PANDARUS. And she takes upon her to spy a white hair on his chin.
  PANDARUS. But there was such laughing! Queen Hecuba laugh'd that
    her eyes ran o'er.
  PANDARUS. And Cassandra laugh'd.
  PANDARUS. And Hector laugh'd.
  PANDARUS. Marry, at the white hair that Helen spied on Troilus'
    chin.
  PANDARUS. They laugh'd not so much at the hair as at his pretty
    answer.
  PANDARUS. Quoth she 'Here's but two and fifty hairs on your chin,
    and one of them is white.'
  PANDARUS. That's true; make no question of that. 'Two and fifty
    hairs,' quoth he 'and one white. That white hair is my father,
    and all the rest are his sons.' 'Jupiter!' quoth she 'which of
    these hairs is Paris my husband?' 'The forked one,' quoth he,
    'pluck't out and give it him.' But there was such laughing! and
    Helen so blush'd, and Paris so chaf'd; and all the rest so  
    laugh'd that it pass'd.
  PANDARUS. Well, cousin, I told you a thing yesterday; think on't.
  PANDARUS. I'll be sworn 'tis true; he will weep you, and 'twere a
    man born in April.
  PANDARUS. Hark! they are coming from the field. Shall we stand up
    here and see them as they pass toward Ilium? Good niece, do,
    sweet niece Cressida.
  PANDARUS. Here, here, here's an excellent place; here we may see
    most bravely. I'll tell you them all by their names as they pass
    by; but mark Troilus above the rest.
                       AENEAS passes
  PANDARUS. That's Aeneas. Is not that a brave man? He's one of the  
    flowers of Troy, I can tell you. But mark Troilus; you shall see
    anon.
                       ANTENOR passes
  PANDARUS. That's Antenor. He has a shrewd wit, I can tell you; and
    he's a man good enough; he's one o' th' soundest judgments in
    Troy, whosoever, and a proper man of person. When comes Troilus?
    I'll show you Troilus anon. If he see me, you shall see him nod
    at me.
  PANDARUS. You shall see.
  PANDARUS. That's Hector, that, that, look you, that; there's a
    fellow! Go thy way, Hector! There's a brave man, niece. O brave
    Hector! Look how he looks. There's a countenance! Is't not a  
    brave man?
  PANDARUS. Is 'a not? It does a man's heart good. Look you what
    hacks are on his helmet! Look you yonder, do you see? Look you
    there. There's no jesting; there's laying on; take't off who
    will, as they say. There be hacks.
  PANDARUS. Swords! anything, he cares not; an the devil come to him,
    it's all one. By God's lid, it does one's heart good. Yonder
    comes Paris, yonder comes Paris.
                       PARIS passes
    Look ye yonder, niece; is't not a gallant man too, is't not? Why,
    this is brave now. Who said he came hurt home to-day? He's not
    hurt. Why, this will do Helen's heart good now, ha! Would I could
    see Troilus now! You shall see Troilus anon.
                      HELENUS passes
  
  PANDARUS. That's Helenus. I marvel where Troilus is. That's
    Helenus. I think he went not forth to-day. That's Helenus.
  PANDARUS. Helenus! no. Yes, he'll fight indifferent well. I marvel
    where Troilus is. Hark! do you not hear the people cry 'Troilus'?
    Helenus is a priest.
  PANDARUS. Where? yonder? That's Deiphobus. 'Tis Troilus. There's a
    man, niece. Hem! Brave Troilus, the prince of chivalry!
  PANDARUS. Mark him; note him. O brave Troilus! Look well upon him,
    niece; look you how his sword is bloodied, and his helm more
    hack'd than Hector's; and how he looks, and how he goes! O
    admirable youth! he never saw three and twenty. Go thy way,
    Troilus, go thy way. Had I a sister were a grace or a daughter a
    goddess, he should take his choice. O admirable man! Paris? Paris  
    is dirt to him; and, I warrant, Helen, to change, would give an
    eye to boot.
  PANDARUS. Asses, fools, dolts! chaff and bran, chaff and bran!
    porridge after meat! I could live and die in the eyes of Troilus.
    Ne'er look, ne'er look; the eagles are gone. Crows and daws,
    crows and daws! I had rather be such a man as Troilus than
    Agamemnon and all Greece.
  PANDARUS. Achilles? A drayman, a porter, a very camel!
  PANDARUS. Well, well! Why, have you any discretion? Have you any
    eyes? Do you know what a man is? Is not birth, beauty, good
    shape, discourse, manhood, learning, gentleness, virtue, youth,
    liberality, and such like, the spice and salt that season a man?
  PANDARUS. You are such a woman! A man knows not at what ward you
    lie.
  PANDARUS. Say one of your watches.
  PANDARUS. You are such another!
                   Enter TROILUS' BOY
  PANDARUS. Where?
  PANDARUS. Good boy, tell him I come.                       Exit Boy  
    I doubt he be hurt. Fare ye well, good niece.
  PANDARUS. I will be with you, niece, by and by.
  PANDARUS. Ay, a token from Troilus.
  PANDARUS. Friend, you-pray you, a word. Do you not follow the young
    Lord Paris?
  PANDARUS. You depend upon him, I mean?
  PANDARUS. You depend upon a notable gentleman; I must needs praise
    him.
  PANDARUS. You know me, do you not?
  PANDARUS. Friend, know me better: I am the Lord Pandarus.
  PANDARUS. I do desire it.
  PANDARUS. Grace! Not so, friend; honour and lordship are my titles.
    What music is this?
  PANDARUS. Know you the musicians?
  PANDARUS. Who play they to?
  PANDARUS. At whose pleasure, friend?
  PANDARUS. Command, I mean, friend.
  PANDARUS. Friend, we understand not one another: I am to courtly,
    and thou art too cunning. At whose request do these men play?
  PANDARUS. Who, my cousin, Cressida?
  PANDARUS. It should seem, fellow, that thou hast not seen the Lady
    Cressida. I come to speak with Paris from the Prince Troilus; I
    will make a complimental assault upon him, for my business
    seethes.  
  PANDARUS. Fair be to you, my lord, and to all this fair company!
    Fair desires, in all fair measure, fairly guide them- especially
    to you, fair queen! Fair thoughts be your fair pillow.
  PANDARUS. You speak your fair pleasure, sweet queen. Fair prince,
    here is good broken music.
  PANDARUS. Truly, lady, no.
  PANDARUS. Rude, in sooth; in good sooth, very rude.
  PANDARUS. I have business to my lord, dear queen. My lord, will you
    vouchsafe me a word?  
  PANDARUS. Well sweet queen, you are pleasant with me. But, marry,
    thus, my lord: my dear lord and most esteemed friend, your
    brother Troilus-
  PANDARUS. Go to, sweet queen, go to-commends himself most
    affectionately to you-
  PANDARUS. Sweet queen, sweet queen; that's a sweet queen, i' faith.
  PANDARUS. Nay, that shall not serve your turn; that shall it not,
    in truth, la. Nay, I care not for such words; no, no. -And, my
    lord, he desires you that, if the King call for him at supper,
    you will make his excuse.
  PANDARUS. What says my sweet queen, my very very sweet queen?
  PANDARUS. What says my sweet queen?-My cousin will fall out with
    you.
  PANDARUS. No, no, no such matter; you are wide. Come, your disposer
    is sick.
  PANDARUS. Ay, good my lord. Why should you say Cressida?
    No, your poor disposer's sick.
  PANDARUS. You spy! What do you spy?-Come, give me an instrument.
    Now, sweet queen.
  PANDARUS. My niece is horribly in love with a thing you have, sweet
    queen.
  PANDARUS. He! No, she'll none of him; they two are twain.
  PANDARUS. Come, come. I'll hear no more of this; I'll sing you a
    song now.  
  PANDARUS. Ay, you may, you may.
  PANDARUS. Love! Ay, that it shall, i' faith.
  PANDARUS. In good troth, it begins so.                      [Sings]
    Love, love, nothing but love, still love, still more!
           For, oh, love's bow
           Shoots buck and doe;
           The shaft confounds
           Not that it wounds,
    But tickles still the sore.
    These lovers cry, O ho, they die!
       Yet that which seems the wound to kill
    Doth turn O ho! to ha! ha! he!
       So dying love lives still.
    O ho! a while, but ha! ha! ha!  
    O ho! groans out for ha! ha! ha!-hey ho!
  PANDARUS. Is this the generation of love: hot blood, hot thoughts,
    and hot deeds? Why, they are vipers. Is love a generation of
    vipers? Sweet lord, who's a-field today?
  PANDARUS. Not I, honey-sweet queen. I long to hear how they spend
    to-day. You'll remember your brother's excuse?
  PANDARUS. Farewell, sweet queen.
  PANDARUS. I will, sweet queen.                Exit. Sound a retreat
  PANDARUS. How now! Where's thy master? At my cousin Cressida's?
  PANDARUS. O, here he comes. How now, how now!
  PANDARUS. Have you seen my cousin?
  PANDARUS. Walk here i' th' orchard, I'll bring her straight.  
      Exit
  PANDARUS. She's making her ready, she'll come straight; you must be
    witty now. She does so blush, and fetches her wind so short, as
    if she were fray'd with a sprite. I'll fetch her. It is the
    prettiest villain; she fetches her breath as short as a new-ta'en  
    sparrow.                                                     Exit
  PANDARUS. Come, come, what need you blush? Shame's a baby.-Here she
    is now; swear the oaths now to her that you have sworn to me.-
    What, are you gone again? You must be watch'd ere you be made
    tame, must you? Come your ways, come your ways; an you draw
    backward, we'll put you i' th' fills.-Why do you not speak to
    her?-Come, draw this curtain and let's see your picture.
    Alas the day, how loath you are to offend daylight! An 'twere
    dark, you'd close sooner. So, so; rub on, and kiss the mistress
    How now, a kiss in fee-farm! Build there, carpenter; the air is
    sweet. Nay, you shall fight your hearts out ere I part you. The
    falcon as the tercel, for all the ducks i' th' river. Go to, go  
    to.
  PANDARUS. Words pay no debts, give her deeds; but she'll bereave
    you o' th' deeds too, if she call your activity in question.
    What, billing again? Here's 'In witness whereof the parties
    interchangeably.' Come in, come in; I'll go get a fire.
      Exit
  PANDARUS. What, blushing still? Have you not done talking yet?
  PANDARUS. I thank you for that; if my lord get a boy of you, you'll
    give him me. Be true to my lord; if he flinch, chide me for it.
  PANDARUS. Nay, I'll give my word for her too: our kindred, though
    they be long ere they are wooed, they are constant being won;
    they are burs, I can tell you; they'll stick where they are
    thrown.
  PANDARUS. Pretty, i' faith.
  PANDARUS. Leave! An you take leave till to-morrow morning-
  PANDARUS. Go to, a bargain made; seal it, seal it; I'll be the  
    witness. Here I hold your hand; here my cousin's. If ever you
    prove false one to another, since I have taken such pains to
    bring you together, let all pitiful goers- between be call'd to
    the world's end after my name-call them all Pandars; let all
    constant men be Troiluses, all false women Cressids, and all
    brokers between Pandars. Say 'Amen.'
  PANDARUS. Amen. Whereupon I will show you a chamber
    and a bed; which bed, because it shall not speak of your
    pretty encounters, press it to death. Away!
    And Cupid grant all tongue-tied maidens here,
    Bed, chamber, pander, to provide this gear!                Exeunt
ACT III. SCENE 3.
The Greek camp
Flourish. Enter AGAMEMNON, ULYSSES, DIOMEDES, NESTOR, AJAX, MENELAUS,
and CALCHAS
  PANDARUS. [Within] What's all the doors open here?
  PANDARUS. How now, how now! How go maidenheads?
    Here, you maid! Where's my cousin Cressid?
  PANDARUS. To do what? to do what? Let her say what.
    What have I brought you to do?
  PANDARUS. Ha, ha! Alas, poor wretch! a poor capocchia! hast not
    slept to-night? Would he not, a naughty man, let it sleep? A
    bugbear take him!
  PANDARUS. Who's there? What's the matter? Will you beat down the
    door? How now? What's the matter?
                          Enter AENEAS  
  PANDARUS. Who's there? My lord Aeneas? By my troth,
    I knew you not. What news with you so early?
  PANDARUS. Here! What should he do here?
  PANDARUS. Is he here, say you? It's more than I know, I'll be
    sworn. For my own part, I came in late. What should he do here?
  PANDARUS. Is't possible? No sooner got but lost? The devil take
    Antenor! The young prince will go mad. A plague upon Antenor! I
    would they had broke's neck.
                     Re-enter CRESSIDA
  PANDARUS. Ah, ah!
  PANDARUS. Would I were as deep under the earth as I am above!
  PANDARUS. Pray thee, get thee in. Would thou hadst ne'er been born!
    I knew thou wouldst be his death! O, poor gentleman! A plague
    upon Antenor!
  PANDARUS. Thou must be gone, wench, thou must be gone; thou art
    chang'd for Antenor; thou must to thy father, and be gone from
    Troilus. 'Twill be his death; 'twill be his bane; he cannot bear
    it.
  PANDARUS. Thou must.
  PANDARUS. Do, do.
  PANDARUS. Be moderate, be moderate.
  PANDARUS. Here, here, here he comes. Ah, sweet ducks!
  PANDARUS. What a pair of spectacles is here! Let me embrace too. 'O
    heart,' as the goodly saying is,  
          O heart, heavy heart,
       Why sigh'st thou without breaking?
    where he answers again
       Because thou canst not ease thy smart
       By friendship nor by speaking.
    There was never a truer rhyme. Let us cast away nothing, for we
    may live to have need of such a verse. We see it, we see it. How
    now, lambs!
  PANDARUS. Ay, ay, ay; 'tis too plain a case.
  PANDARUS. Where are my tears? Rain, to lay this wind, or my heart  
    will be blown up by th' root?                                Exit
  PANDARUS. Do you hear, my lord? Do you hear?
  PANDARUS. Here's a letter come from yond poor girl.
  PANDARUS. A whoreson tisick, a whoreson rascally tisick so troubles
    me, and the foolish fortune of this girl, and what one thing,
    what another, that I shall leave you one o' th's days; and I have
    a rheum in mine eyes too, and such an ache in my bones that
    unless a man were curs'd I cannot tell what to think on't. What
    says she there?
  PANDARUS. But hear you, hear you!
  PANDARUS. A goodly medicine for my aching bones! world! world! thus
    is the poor agent despis'd! traitors and bawds, how earnestly are
    you set a work, and how ill requited! Why should our endeavour be
    so lov'd, and the performance so loathed? What verse for it? What
    instance for it? Let me see-
          Full merrily the humble-bee doth sing
          Till he hath lost his honey and his sting;
          And being once subdu'd in armed trail,
          Sweet honey and sweet notes together fail.
    Good traders in the flesh, set this in your painted
    cloths. As many as be here of pander's hall,
    Your eyes, half out, weep out at Pandar's fall;
    Or, if you cannot weep, yet give some groans,  
    Though not for me, yet for your aching bones.
    Brethren and sisters of the hold-door trade,
    Some two months hence my will shall here be made.
    It should be now, but that my fear is this,
    Some galled goose of Winchester would hiss.
    Till then I'll sweat and seek about for eases,
    And at that time bequeath you my diseases.                   Exit
THE END
