  ARMADO. Boy, what sign is it when a man of great spirit grows
    melancholy?
  ARMADO. Why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear imp.
  ARMADO. How canst thou part sadness and melancholy, my tender
    juvenal?
  ARMADO. Why tough signior? Why tough signior?
  ARMADO. I spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epitheton
    appertaining to thy young days, which we may nominate tender.
  ARMADO. Pretty and apt.
  ARMADO. Thou pretty, because little.
  ARMADO. And therefore apt, because quick.
  ARMADO. In thy condign praise.
  ARMADO. that an eel is ingenious?
  ARMADO. I do say thou art quick in answers; thou heat'st my blood.
  ARMADO. I love not to be cross'd.
  ARMADO. I have promised to study three years with the Duke.
  ARMADO. Impossible.
  ARMADO. I am ill at reck'ning; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster.
  ARMADO. I confess both; they are both the varnish of a complete
    man.  
  ARMADO. It doth amount to one more than two.
  ARMADO. True.
  ARMADO. A most fine figure!
  ARMADO. I will hereupon confess I am in love. And as it is base for
    a soldier to love, so am I in love with a base wench. If drawing
    my sword against the humour of affection would deliver me from
    the reprobate thought of it, I would take Desire prisoner, and
    ransom him to any French courtier for a new-devis'd curtsy. I
    think scorn to sigh; methinks I should out-swear Cupid. Comfort
    me, boy; what great men have been in love?
  ARMADO. Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear boy, name more;  
    and, sweet my child, let them be men of good repute and carriage.
  ARMADO. O well-knit Samson! strong-jointed Samson! I do excel thee
    in my rapier as much as thou didst me in carrying gates. I am in
    love too. Who was Samson's love, my dear Moth?
  ARMADO. Of what complexion?
  ARMADO. Tell me precisely of what complexion.
  ARMADO. Is that one of the four complexions?
  ARMADO. Green, indeed, is the colour of lovers; but to have a love
    of that colour, methinks Samson had small reason for it. He
    surely affected her for her wit.
  ARMADO. My love is most immaculate white and red.  
  ARMADO. Define, define, well-educated infant.
  ARMADO. Sweet invocation of a child; most pretty, and pathetical!
  ARMADO. Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the Beggar?
  ARMADO. I will have that subject newly writ o'er, that I may
    example my digression by some mighty precedent. Boy, I do love  
    that country girl that I took in the park with the rational hind
    Costard; she deserves well.
  ARMADO. Sing, boy; my spirit grows heavy in love.
  ARMADO. I say, sing.
  ARMADO. I do betray myself with blushing. Maid!
  ARMADO. I will visit thee at the lodge.
  ARMADO. I know where it is situate.
  ARMADO. I will tell thee wonders.
  ARMADO. I love thee.
  ARMADO. And so, farewell.
  ARMADO. Villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be
    pardoned.
  ARMADO. Thou shalt be heavily punished.
  ARMADO. Take away this villain; shut him up.
  ARMADO. I do affect the very ground, which is base, where her shoe,
    which is baser, guided by her foot, which is basest, doth tread.
    I shall be forsworn- which is a great argument of falsehood- if I
    love. And how can that be true love which is falsely attempted?
    Love is a familiar; Love is a devil. There is no evil angel but
    Love. Yet was Samson so tempted, and he had an excellent
    strength; yet was Solomon so seduced, and he had a very good wit.
    Cupid's butt-shaft is too hard for Hercules' club, and therefore
    too much odds for a Spaniard's rapier. The first and second cause
    will not serve my turn; the passado he respects not, the duello
    he regards not; his disgrace is to be called boy, but his glory
    is to subdue men. Adieu, valour; rust, rapier; be still, drum;
    for your manager is in love; yea, he loveth. Assist me, some
    extemporal god of rhyme, for I am sure I shall turn sonnet.  
    Devise, wit; write, pen; for I am for whole volumes in folio.
 Exit








ACT II. SCENE II.
The park
Enter the PRINCESS OF FRANCE, with three attending ladies,
ROSALINE, MARIA, KATHARINE, BOYET, and two other LORDS
  ARMADO. Warble, child; make passionate my sense of hearing.
                                         [MOTH sings Concolinel]
  ARMADO. Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years, take this key, give
    enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately hither; I must
    employ him in a letter to my love.
  ARMADO. Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years, take this key, give
    enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately hither; I must
    employ him in a letter to my love.
  ARMADO. How meanest thou? Brawling in French?
  ARMADO. How hast thou purchased this experience?
  ARMADO. But O- but O-
  ARMADO. Call'st thou my love 'hobby-horse'?
  ARMADO. Almost I had.
  ARMADO. By heart and in heart, boy.
  ARMADO. What wilt thou prove?
  ARMADO. I am all these three.  
  ARMADO. Fetch hither the swain; he must carry me a letter.
  ARMADO. Ha, ha, what sayest thou?
  ARMADO. The way is but short; away.
  ARMADO. The meaning, pretty ingenious?
    Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?
  ARMADO. I say lead is slow.
  ARMADO. Sweet smoke of rhetoric!
    He reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that's he;
    I shoot thee at the swain.
  ARMADO. A most acute juvenal; volable and free of grace!  
    By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face;
    Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.
    My herald is return'd.
                       Re-enter MOTH with COSTARD
  ARMADO. Some enigma, some riddle; come, thy l'envoy; begin.
  ARMADO. By virtue thou enforcest laughter; thy silly thought, my
    spleen; the heaving of my lungs provokes me to ridiculous
    smiling. O, pardon me, my stars! Doth the inconsiderate take
    salve for l'envoy, and the word 'l'envoy' for a salve?
  ARMADO. No, page; it is an epilogue or discourse to make plain
    Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.
    I will example it:
           The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,  
           Were still at odds, being but three.
    There's the moral. Now the l'envoy.
  ARMADO.  The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
           Were still at odds, being but three.
  ARMADO.  Until the goose came out of door,
           Staying the odds by adding four.
  ARMADO. Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?
  ARMADO. But tell me: how was there a costard broken in a shin?
  ARMADO. We will talk no more of this matter.
  ARMADO. Sirrah Costard. I will enfranchise thee.
  ARMADO. By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty,
    enfreedoming thy person; thou wert immured, restrained,
    captivated, bound.
  ARMADO. I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and, in  
    lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this: bear this
    significant [giving a letter] to the country maid Jaquenetta;
    there is remuneration, for the best ward of mine honour is
    rewarding my dependents. Moth, follow.                  Exit
  ARMADO. [To MOTH] Chirrah!
  ARMADO. Men of peace, well encount'red.
  ARMADO. [To HOLOFERNES] Monsieur, are you not lett'red?
  ARMADO. Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet touch,
    a quick venue of wit- snip, snap, quick and home. It rejoiceth my
    intellect. True wit!
  ARMADO. Arts-man, preambulate; we will be singuled from the
    barbarous. Do you not educate youth at the charge-house on the
    top of the mountain?
  ARMADO. At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.
  ARMADO. Sir, it is the King's most sweet pleasure and affection to
    congratulate the Princess at her pavilion, in the posteriors of
    this day; which the rude multitude call the afternoon.  
  ARMADO. Sir, the King is a noble gentleman, and my familiar, I do
    assure ye, very good friend. For what is inward between us, let
    it pass. I do beseech thee, remember thy courtesy. I beseech
    thee, apparel thy head. And among other importunate and most
    serious designs, and of great import indeed, too- but let that
    pass; for I must tell thee it will please his Grace, by the
    world, sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder, and with his royal
    finger thus dally with my excrement, with my mustachio; but,
    sweet heart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no fable:
    some certain special honours it pleaseth his greatness to impart
    to Armado, a soldier, a man of travel, that hath seen the world;
    but let that pass. The very all of all is- but, sweet heart, I do
    implore secrecy- that the King would have me present the
    Princess, sweet chuck, with some delightful ostentation, or show,
    or pageant, or antic, or firework. Now, understanding that the
    curate and your sweet self are good at such eruptions and sudden
    breaking-out of mirth, as it were, I have acquainted you withal,  
    to the end to crave your assistance.
  ARMADO. Pardon, sir; error: he is not quantity enough for that
    Worthy's thumb; he is not so big as the end of his club.
  ARMADO. For the rest of the Worthies?
  ARMADO. Shall I tell you a thing?
  ARMADO. We will have, if this fadge not, an antic. I beseech you,
    follow.
  ARMADO. Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal sweet
    breath as will utter a brace of words.
           [Converses apart with the KING, and delivers a paper]
  ARMADO. That is all one, my fair, sweet, honey monarch; for, I
    protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding fantastical; too too vain,
    too too vain; but we will put it, as they say, to fortuna de la
    guerra. I wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement!
                                                     Exit ARMADO
  ARMADO. The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
    Gave Hector a gift-
  ARMADO. Peace!
    The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
    Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion;
    A man so breathed that certain he would fight ye,
    From morn till night out of his pavilion.
    I am that flower-
  ARMADO. Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.
  ARMADO. The sweet war-man is dead and rotten; sweet chucks, beat
    not the bones of the buried; when he breathed, he was a man. But  
    I will forward with my device. [To the PRINCESS] Sweet royalty,
    bestow on me the sense of hearing.
          [BEROWNE steps forth, and speaks to COSTARD]
  ARMADO. I do adore thy sweet Grace's slipper.
  ARMADO. This Hector far surmounted Hannibal-
  ARMADO. What meanest thou?
  ARMADO. Dost thou infamonize me among potentates? Thou shalt die.
  ARMADO. By the North Pole, I do challenge thee.
  ARMADO. Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me; I will not combat in my  
    shirt.
  ARMADO. Sweet bloods, I both may and will.
  ARMADO. The naked truth of it is: I have no shirt; I go woolward
    for penance.
  ARMADO. For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I have seen the
    day of wrong through the little hole of discretion, and I will
    right myself like a soldier.                 Exeunt WORTHIES
  ARMADO. Sweet Majesty, vouchsafe me-
  ARMADO. I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I am a
    votary: I have vow'd to Jaquenetta to hold the plough for her
    sweet love three year. But, most esteemed greatness, will you
    hear the dialogue that the two learned men have compiled in
    praise of the Owl and the Cuckoo? It should have followed in the
    end of our show.
  ARMADO. Holla! approach.
                            Enter All
    This side is Hiems, Winter; this Ver, the Spring- the one  
    maintained by the Owl, th' other by the Cuckoo. Ver, begin.
                      SPRING
         When daisies pied and violets blue
         And lady-smocks all silver-white
         And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue
         Do paint the meadows with delight,
         The cuckoo then on every tree
         Mocks married men, for thus sings he:
              'Cuckoo;
         Cuckoo, cuckoo'- O word of fear,
         Unpleasing to a married ear!
         When shepherds pipe on oaten straws,
         And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks;
         When turtles tread, and rooks and daws,
         And maidens bleach their summer smocks;
         The cuckoo then on every tree
         Mocks married men, for thus sings he:
              'Cuckoo;  
         Cuckoo, cuckoo'- O word of fear,
         Unpleasing to a married ear!
                    WINTER
         When icicles hang by the wall,
         And Dick the shepherd blows his nail,
         And Tom bears logs into the hall,
         And milk comes frozen home in pail,
         When blood is nipp'd, and ways be foul,
         Then nightly sings the staring owl:
              'Tu-who;
         Tu-whit, Tu-who'- A merry note,
         While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
         When all aloud the wind doth blow,
         And coughing drowns the parson's saw,
         And birds sit brooding in the snow,
         And Marian's nose looks red and raw,
         When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,  
         Then nightly sings the staring owl:
              'Tu-who;
         Tu-whit, To-who'- A merry note,
         While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
  ARMADO. The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of Apollo.
    You that way: we this way.                            Exeunt
THE END
  ARMADO. The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of Apollo.
    You that way: we this way.                            Exeunt
THE END
