  ROSALINE. Another of these students at that time
    Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.
    Berowne they call him; but a merrier man,
    Within the limit of becoming mirth,
    I never spent an hour's talk withal.
    His eye begets occasion for his wit,
    For every object that the one doth catch
    The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
    Which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor,
    Delivers in such apt and gracious words
    That aged ears play truant at his tales,  
    And younger hearings are quite ravished;
    So sweet and voluble is his discourse.
  ROSALINE. Pray you, do my commendations;  
    I would be glad to see it.
  ROSALINE. Is the fool sick?
  ROSALINE. Alack, let it blood.
  ROSALINE. My physic says 'ay.'
  ROSALINE. No point, with my knife.
  ROSALINE. And yours from long living!
  ROSALINE. Then was Venus like her mother; for her father is but
    grim.
  ROSALINE. Shall I teach you to know?
  ROSALINE. Why, she that bears the bow.
    Finely put off!
  ROSALINE. Well then, I am the shooter.
  ROSALINE. If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
    Finely put on indeed!
  ROSALINE. Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was a man
    when King Pepin of France was a little boy, as touching the hit  
    it?
  ROSALINE. [Singing]
            Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it,
            Thou canst not hit it, my good man.
  ROSALINE. Madam, came nothing else along with that?
  ROSALINE. That was the way to make his godhead wax;
    For he hath been five thousand year a boy.
  ROSALINE. You'll ne'er be friends with him: 'a kill'd your sister.
  ROSALINE. What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?
  ROSALINE. We need more light to find your meaning out.
  ROSALINE. Look what you do, you do it still i' th' dark.
  ROSALINE. Indeed, I weigh not you; and therefore light.
  ROSALINE. Great reason; for 'past cure is still past care.'
  ROSALINE. I would you knew.
    An if my face were but as fair as yours,
    My favour were as great: be witness this.
    Nay, I have verses too, I thank Berowne;
    The numbers true, and, were the numb'ring too,
    I were the fairest goddess on the ground.  
    I am compar'd to twenty thousand fairs.
    O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter!
  ROSALINE. Much in the letters; nothing in the praise.
  ROSALINE. Ware pencils, ho! Let me not die your debtor,
    My red dominical, my golden letter:
    O that your face were not so full of O's!
  ROSALINE. They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
    That same Berowne I'll torture ere I go.
    O that I knew he were but in by th' week!
    How I would make him fawn, and beg, and seek,
    And wait the season, and observe the times,
    And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes,
    And shape his service wholly to my hests,
    And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
    So pertaunt-like would I o'ersway his state
    That he should be my fool, and I his fate.
  ROSALINE. The blood of youth burns not with such excess  
    As gravity's revolt to wantonness.
  ROSALINE. Come on, then, wear the favours most in sight.
  ROSALINE. But shall we dance, if they desire us to't?
  ROSALINE. What would these strangers? Know their minds, Boyet.
    If they do speak our language, 'tis our will
    That some plain man recount their purposes.
    Know what they would.
  ROSALINE. What would they, say they?  
  ROSALINE. Why, that they have; and bid them so be gone.
  ROSALINE. It is not so. Ask them how many inches
    Is in one mile? If they have measured many,
    The measure, then, of one is eas'ly told.
  ROSALINE. How many weary steps
    Of many weary miles you have o'ergone
    Are numb'red in the travel of one mile?
  ROSALINE. My face is but a moon, and clouded too.
  ROSALINE. O vain petitioner! beg a greater matter;
    Thou now requests but moonshine in the water.
  ROSALINE. Play, music, then. Nay, you must do it soon.
    Not yet? No dance! Thus change I like the moon.
  ROSALINE. You took the moon at full; but now she's changed.
  ROSALINE. Our ears vouchsafe it.
  ROSALINE. Since you are strangers, and come here by chance,  
    We'll not be nice; take hands. We will not dance.
  ROSALINE. Only to part friends.
    Curtsy, sweet hearts; and so the measure ends.
  ROSALINE. We can afford no more at such a price.
  ROSALINE. Your absence only.
  ROSALINE. Then cannot we be bought; and so adieu-
    Twice to your visor and half once to you.
  ROSALINE. In private then.
  ROSALINE. Not one word more, my maids; break off, break off.
  ROSALINE. Well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.
  ROSALINE. They were all in lamentable cases!
    The King was weeping-ripe for a good word.
  ROSALINE. Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.  
    But will you hear? The King is my love sworn.
  ROSALINE. Good madam, if by me you'll be advis'd,  
    Let's mock them still, as well known as disguis'd.
    Let us complain to them what fools were here,
    Disguis'd like Muscovites, in shapeless gear;
    And wonder what they were, and to what end
    Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd,
    And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
    Should be presented at our tent to us.
  ROSALINE. Madam, speak true. It is not so, my lord.
    My lady, to the manner of the days,
    In courtesy gives undeserving praise.
    We four indeed confronted were with four
    In Russian habit; here they stayed an hour
    And talk'd apace; and in that hour, my lord,  
    They did not bless us with one happy word.
    I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
    When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.
  ROSALINE. This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye-
  ROSALINE. But that you take what doth to you belong,
    It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
  ROSALINE. All the fool mine?
  ROSALINE. Which of the vizards was it that you wore?
  ROSALINE. There, then, that vizard; that superfluous case
    That hid the worse and show'd the better face.  
  ROSALINE. Help, hold his brows! he'll swoon! Why look you pale?
    Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.
  ROSALINE. Sans 'sans,' I pray you.
  ROSALINE. It is not so; for how can this be true,
    That you stand forfeit, being those that sue?  
  ROSALINE. Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
  ROSALINE. Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
    As precious eyesight, and did value me
    Above this world; adding thereto, moreover,
    That he would wed me, or else die my lover.
  ROSALINE. By heaven, you did; and, to confirm it plain,
    You gave me this; but take it, sir, again.
  ROSALINE. We did not quote them so.
  ROSALINE. You must he purged too, your sins are rack'd;
    You are attaint with faults and perjury;
    Therefore, if you my favour mean to get,  
    A twelvemonth shall you spend, and never rest,
    But seek the weary beds of people sick.
  ROSALINE. Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Berowne,
    Before I saw you; and the world's large tongue
    Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
    Full of comparisons and wounding flouts,
    Which you on all estates will execute
    That lie within the mercy of your wit.
    To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain,
    And therewithal to win me, if you please,
    Without the which I am not to be won,
    You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
    Visit the speechless sick, and still converse
    With groaning wretches; and your task shall be,
    With all the fierce endeavour of your wit,
    To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
  ROSALINE. Why, that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,  
    Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
    Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools.
    A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
    Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
    Of him that makes it; then, if sickly ears,
    Deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans,
    Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
    And I will have you and that fault withal.
    But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
    And I shall find you empty of that fault,
    Right joyful of your reformation.
