  JULIA. But say, Lucetta, now we are alone,
    Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love?
  JULIA. Of all the fair resort of gentlemen
    That every day with parle encounter me,
    In thy opinion which is worthiest love?
  JULIA. What think'st thou of the fair Sir Eglamour?
  JULIA. What think'st thou of the rich Mercatio?
  JULIA. What think'st thou of the gentle Proteus?
  JULIA. How now! what means this passion at his name?
  JULIA. Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest?
  JULIA. Your reason?
  JULIA. And wouldst thou have me cast my love on him?
  JULIA. Why, he, of all the rest, hath never mov'd me.
  JULIA. His little speaking shows his love but small.
  JULIA. They do not love that do not show their love.
  JULIA. I would I knew his mind.
  JULIA. 'To Julia'- Say, from whom?
  JULIA. Say, say, who gave it thee?  
  JULIA. Now, by my modesty, a goodly broker!
    Dare you presume to harbour wanton lines?
    To whisper and conspire against my youth?
    Now, trust me, 'tis an office of great worth,
    And you an officer fit for the place.
    There, take the paper; see it be return'd;
    Or else return no more into my sight.
  JULIA. Will ye be gone?
  JULIA. And yet, I would I had o'erlook'd the letter.
    It were a shame to call her back again,
    And pray her to a fault for which I chid her.
    What fool is she, that knows I am a maid
    And would not force the letter to my view!
    Since maids, in modesty, say 'No' to that
    Which they would have the profferer construe 'Ay.'  
    Fie, fie, how wayward is this foolish love,
    That like a testy babe will scratch the nurse,
    And presently, all humbled, kiss the rod!
    How churlishly I chid Lucetta hence,
    When willingly I would have had her here!
    How angerly I taught my brow to frown,
    When inward joy enforc'd my heart to smile!
    My penance is to call Lucetta back
    And ask remission for my folly past.
    What ho! Lucetta!
                     Re-enter LUCETTA
  JULIA. Is't near dinner time?
  JULIA. What is't that you took up so gingerly?
  JULIA. Why didst thou stoop then?
  JULIA. And is that paper nothing?
  JULIA. Then let it lie for those that it concerns.
  JULIA. Some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme.
  JULIA. As little by such toys as may be possible.
    Best sing it to the tune of 'Light o' Love.'
  JULIA. Heavy! belike it hath some burden then.
  JULIA. And why not you?
  JULIA. Let's see your song.     [LUCETTA withholds the letter]
    How now, minion!
  JULIA. You do not!
  JULIA. You, minion, are too saucy.
  JULIA. The mean is drown'd with your unruly bass.
  JULIA. This babble shall not henceforth trouble me.
    Here is a coil with protestation!         [Tears the letter]
    Go, get you gone; and let the papers lie.
    You would be fing'ring them, to anger me.
  JULIA. Nay, would I were so ang'red with the same!
    O hateful hands, to tear such loving words!
    Injurious wasps, to feed on such sweet honey
    And kill the bees that yield it with your stings!
    I'll kiss each several paper for amends.  
    Look, here is writ 'kind Julia.' Unkind Julia,
    As in revenge of thy ingratitude,
    I throw thy name against the bruising stones,
    Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain.
    And here is writ 'love-wounded Proteus.'
    Poor wounded name! my bosom,,as a bed,
    Shall lodge thee till thy wound be throughly heal'd;
    And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss.
    But twice or thrice was 'Proteus' written down.
    Be calm, good wind, blow not a word away
    Till I have found each letter in the letter-
    Except mine own name; that some whirlwind bear
    Unto a ragged, fearful, hanging rock,
    And throw it thence into the raging sea.
    Lo, here in one line is his name twice writ:
    'Poor forlorn Proteus, passionate Proteus,
    To the sweet Julia.' That I'll tear away;
    And yet I will not, sith so prettily
    He couples it to his complaining names.
    Thus will I fold them one upon another;  
    Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.
                        Re-enter LUCETTA
  JULIA. Well, let us go.
  JULIA. If you respect them, best to take them up.
  JULIA. I see you have a month's mind to them.
  JULIA. Come, come; will't please you go?                Exeunt
SCENE III.
Verona. ANTONIO'S house
Enter ANTONIO and PANTHINO
  JULIA. I must, where is no remedy.
  JULIA. If you turn not, you will return the sooner.
    Keep this remembrance for thy Julia's sake.
                                                 [Giving a ring]
  JULIA. And seal the bargain with a holy kiss.
  JULIA. Counsel, Lucetta; gentle girl, assist me;
    And, ev'n in kind love, I do conjure thee,
    Who art the table wherein all my thoughts
    Are visibly character'd and engrav'd,
    To lesson me and tell me some good mean
    How, with my honour, I may undertake
    A journey to my loving Proteus.
  JULIA. A true-devoted pilgrim is not weary
    To measure kingdoms with his feeble steps;
    Much less shall she that hath Love's wings to fly,
    And when the flight is made to one so dear,
    Of such divine perfection, as Sir Proteus.
  JULIA. O, know'st thou not his looks are my soul's food?
    Pity the dearth that I have pined in
    By longing for that food so long a time.  
    Didst thou but know the inly touch of love.
    Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow
    As seek to quench the fire of love with words.
  JULIA. The more thou dam'st it up, the more it burns.
    The current that with gentle murmur glides,
    Thou know'st, being stopp'd, impatiently doth rage;
    But when his fair course is not hindered,
    He makes sweet music with th' enamell'd stones,
    Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge
    He overtaketh in his pilgrimage;
    And so by many winding nooks he strays,
    With willing sport, to the wild ocean.
    Then let me go, and hinder not my course.
    I'll be as patient as a gentle stream,
    And make a pastime of each weary step,
    Till the last step have brought me to my love;
    And there I'll rest as, after much turmoil,  
    A blessed soul doth in Elysium.
  JULIA. Not like a woman, for I would prevent
    The loose encounters of lascivious men;
    Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds
    As may beseem some well-reputed page.
  JULIA. No, girl; I'll knit it up in silken strings
    With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots-
    To be fantastic may become a youth
    Of greater time than I shall show to be.
  JULIA. That fits as well as 'Tell me, good my lord,
    What compass will you wear your farthingale.'
    Why ev'n what fashion thou best likes, Lucetta.
  JULIA. Out, out, Lucetta, that will be ill-favour'd.
  JULIA. Lucetta, as thou lov'st me, let me have  
    What thou think'st meet, and is most mannerly.
    But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me
    For undertaking so unstaid a journey?
    I fear me it will make me scandaliz'd.
  JULIA. Nay, that I will not.
  JULIA. That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear:
    A thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears,
    And instances of infinite of love,
    Warrant me welcome to my Proteus.
  JULIA. Base men that use them to so base effect!
    But truer stars did govern Proteus' birth;
    His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles,
    His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate,
    His tears pure messengers sent from his heart,  
    His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth.
  JULIA. Now, as thou lov'st me, do him not that wrong
    To bear a hard opinion of his truth;
    Only deserve my love by loving him.
    And presently go with me to my chamber,
    To take a note of what I stand in need of
    To furnish me upon my longing journey.
    All that is mine I leave at thy dispose,
    My goods, my lands, my reputation;
    Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence.
    Come, answer not, but to it presently;
    I am impatient of my tarriance.                       Exeunt
ACT III. SCENE I.
Milan. The DUKE'S palace
Enter DUKE, THURIO, and PROTEUS
  JULIA. Marry, mine host, because I cannot be merry.
  JULIA. But shall I hear him speak?
  JULIA. That will be music.
  JULIA. Is he among these?
  JULIA. You mistake; the musician likes me not.
  JULIA. He plays false, father.
  JULIA. Not so; but yet so false that he grieves my very
    heart-strings.
  JULIA. Ay, I would I were deaf; it makes me have a slow heart.
  JULIA. Not a whit, when it jars so.
  JULIA. Ay, that change is the spite.  
  JULIA. I would always have one play but one thing.
    But, Host, doth this Sir Proteus, that we talk on,
    Often resort unto this gentlewoman?
  JULIA. Where is Launce?
  JULIA. Peace, stand aside; the company parts.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  'Twere false, if I should speak it;
    For I am sure she is not buried.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  He heard not that.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  If 'twere a substance, you would, sure, deceive it
    And make it but a shadow, as I am.
  JULIA. Host, will you go?
  JULIA. Pray you, where lies Sir Proteus?
  JULIA. Not so; but it hath been the longest night
    That e'er I watch'd, and the most heaviest.           Exeunt
SCENE III.
Under SILVIA'S window
Enter EGLAMOUR
  JULIA. In what you please; I'll do what I can.
  JULIA. It seems you lov'd not her, to leave her token.
    She is dead, belike?
  JULIA. Alas!
  JULIA. I cannot choose
    But pity her.
  JULIA. Because methinks that she lov'd you as well  
    As you do love your lady Silvia.
    She dreams on him that has forgot her love:
    You dote on her that cares not for your love.
    'Tis pity love should be so contrary;
    And thinking on it makes me cry 'Alas!'
  JULIA. How many women would do such a message?
    Alas, poor Proteus, thou hast entertain'd
    A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs.
    Alas, poor fool, why do I pity him
    That with his very heart despiseth me?
    Because he loves her, he despiseth me;
    Because I love him, I must pity him.
    This ring I gave him, when he parted from me,
    To bind him to remember my good will;
    And now am I, unhappy messenger,  
    To plead for that which I would not obtain,
    To carry that which I would have refus'd,
    To praise his faith, which I would have disprais'd.
    I am my master's true confirmed love,
    But cannot be true servant to my master
    Unless I prove false traitor to myself.
    Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly
    As, heaven it knows, I would not have him speed.
                     Enter SILVIA, attended
    Gentlewoman, good day! I pray you be my mean
    To bring me where to speak with Madam Silvia.
  JULIA. If you be she, I do entreat your patience
    To hear me speak the message I am sent on.
  JULIA. From my master, Sir Proteus, madam.
  JULIA. Ay, madam.  
  JULIA. Madam, please you peruse this letter.
    Pardon me, madam; I have unadvis'd
    Deliver'd you a paper that I should not.
    This is the letter to your ladyship.
  JULIA. It may not be; good madam, pardon me.
  JULIA. Madam, he sends your ladyship this ring.
  JULIA. She thanks you.
  JULIA. I thank you, madam, that you tender her.
    Poor gentlewoman, my master wrongs her much.
  JULIA. Almost as well as I do know myself.
    To think upon her woes, I do protest
    That I have wept a hundred several times.
  JULIA. I think she doth, and that's her cause of sorrow.
  JULIA. She hath been fairer, madam, than she is.
    When she did think my master lov'd her well,
    She, in my judgment, was as fair as you;
    But since she did neglect her looking-glass
    And threw her sun-expelling mask away,
    The air hath starv'd the roses in her cheeks
    And pinch'd the lily-tincture of her face,
    That now she is become as black as I.  
  JULIA. About my stature; for at Pentecost,
    When all our pageants of delight were play'd,
    Our youth got me to play the woman's part,
    And I was trimm'd in Madam Julia's gown;
    Which served me as fit, by all men's judgments,
    As if the garment had been made for me;
    Therefore I know she is about my height.
    And at that time I made her weep a good,
    For I did play a lamentable part.
    Madam, 'twas Ariadne passioning
    For Theseus' perjury and unjust flight;
    Which I so lively acted with my tears
    That my poor mistress, moved therewithal,
    Wept bitterly; and would I might be dead
    If I in thought felt not her very sorrow.
  JULIA. And she shall thank you for't, if e'er you know her.
    A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful!
    I hope my master's suit will be but cold,
    Since she respects my mistress' love so much.
    Alas, how love can trifle with itself!
    Here is her picture; let me see. I think,
    If I had such a tire, this face of mine
    Were full as lovely as is this of hers;
    And yet the painter flatter'd her a little,
    Unless I flatter with myself too much.
    Her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow;
    If that be all the difference in his love,
    I'll get me such a colour'd periwig.
    Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine;
    Ay, but her forehead's low, and mine's as high.
    What should it be that he respects in her
    But I can make respective in myself,
    If this fond Love were not a blinded god?  
    Come, shadow, come, and take this shadow up,
    For 'tis thy rival. O thou senseless form,
    Thou shalt be worshipp'd, kiss'd, lov'd, and ador'd!
    And were there sense in his idolatry
    My substance should be statue in thy stead.
    I'll use thee kindly for thy mistress' sake,
    That us'd me so; or else, by Jove I vow,
    I should have scratch'd out your unseeing eyes,
    To make my master out of love with thee.                Exit
ACT V. SCENE I.
Milan. An abbey
Enter EGLAMOUR
  JULIA.  [Aside]  But love will not be spurr'd to what it loathes.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  'Tis true, such pearls as put out ladies' eyes;
    For I had rather wink than look on them.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  But better, indeed, when you hold your peace.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  She needs not, when she knows it cowardice.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  True; from a gentleman to a fool.
  JULIA.  [Aside]  That such an ass should owe them.
  JULIA. Here comes the Duke.
                          Enter DUKE
  JULIA. And I will follow, more to cross that love
    Than hate for Silvia, that is gone for love.            Exit
SCENE III.
The frontiers of Mantua. The forest
Enter OUTLAWS with SILVA
  JULIA.  [Aside]  And me, when he approacheth to your presence.
  JULIA. O me unhappy!                                  [Swoons]
  JULIA. O good sir, my master charg'd me to deliver a ring to Madam  
    Silvia, which, out of my neglect, was never done.
  JULIA. Here 'tis; this is it.
  JULIA. O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook;
    This is the ring you sent to Silvia.
  JULIA. And Julia herself did give it me;
    And Julia herself have brought it hither.
  JULIA. Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths,
    And entertain'd 'em deeply in her heart.
    How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root!
    O Proteus, let this habit make thee blush!
    Be thou asham'd that I have took upon me
    Such an immodest raiment- if shame live
    In a disguise of love.
    It is the lesser blot, modesty finds,
    Women to change their shapes than men their minds.  
  JULIA. And I mine.
                Enter OUTLAWS, with DUKE and THURIO
