  PROTEUS. Wilt thou be gone? Sweet Valentine, adieu!
    Think on thy Proteus, when thou haply seest
    Some rare noteworthy object in thy travel.
    Wish me partaker in thy happiness
    When thou dost meet good hap; and in thy danger,
    If ever danger do environ thee,
    Commend thy grievance to my holy prayers,  
    For I will be thy headsman, Valentine.
  PROTEUS. Upon some book I love I'll pray for thee.
  PROTEUS. That's a deep story of a deeper love;
    For he was more than over shoes in love.
  PROTEUS. Over the boots! Nay, give me not the boots.
  PROTEUS. What?
  PROTEUS. So, by your circumstance, you call me fool.  
  PROTEUS. 'Tis love you cavil at; I am not Love.
  PROTEUS. Yet writers say, as in the sweetest bud
    The eating canker dwells, so eating love
    Inhabits in the finest wits of all.
  PROTEUS. And thither will I bring thee, Valentine.
  PROTEUS. All happiness bechance to thee in Milan!
  PROTEUS. He after honour hunts, I after love;
    He leaves his friends to dignify them more:
    I leave myself, my friends, and all for love.
    Thou, Julia, thou hast metamorphis'd me,
    Made me neglect my studies, lose my time,
    War with good counsel, set the world at nought;
    Made wit with musing weak, heart sick with thought.
                         Enter SPEED
  PROTEUS. But now he parted hence to embark for Milan.
  PROTEUS. Indeed a sheep doth very often stray,
    An if the shepherd be awhile away.
  PROTEUS. I do.
  PROTEUS. A silly answer, and fitting well a sheep.
  PROTEUS. True; and thy master a shepherd.
  PROTEUS. It shall go hard but I'll prove it by another.
  PROTEUS. The sheep for fodder follow the shepherd; the shepherd for
    food follows not the sheep: thou for wages followest thy master;
    thy master for wages follows not thee. Therefore, thou art a
    sheep.
  PROTEUS. But dost thou hear? Gav'st thou my letter to Julia?
  PROTEUS. Here's too small a pasture for such store of muttons.
  PROTEUS. Nay, in that you are astray: 'twere best pound you.
  PROTEUS. You mistake; I mean the pound- a pinfold.
  PROTEUS. But what said she?
  PROTEUS. Nod- ay. Why, that's 'noddy.'
  PROTEUS. And that set together is 'noddy.'
  PROTEUS. No, no; you shall have it for bearing the letter.
  PROTEUS. Why, sir, how do you bear with me?
  PROTEUS. Beshrew me, but you have a quick wit.
  PROTEUS. Come, come, open the matter; in brief, what said she?
  PROTEUS. Well, sir, here is for your pains. What said she?
  PROTEUS. Why, couldst thou perceive so much from her?
  PROTEUS. What said she? Nothing?
  PROTEUS. Go, go, be gone, to save your ship from wreck,
    Which cannot perish, having thee aboard,
    Being destin'd to a drier death on shore.         Exit SPEED
    I must go send some better messenger.
    I fear my Julia would not deign my lines,
    Receiving them from such a worthless post.              Exit
SCENE II.
Verona. The garden Of JULIA'S house
Enter JULIA and LUCETTA
  PROTEUS. Sweet love! sweet lines! sweet life!
    Here is her hand, the agent of her heart;
    Here is her oath for love, her honour's pawn.
    O that our fathers would applaud our loves,
    To seal our happiness with their consents!
    O heavenly Julia!
  PROTEUS. May't please your lordship, 'tis a word or two
    Of commendations sent from Valentine,  
    Deliver'd by a friend that came from him.
  PROTEUS. There is no news, my lord; but that he writes
    How happily he lives, how well-belov'd
    And daily graced by the Emperor;
    Wishing me with him, partner of his fortune.
  PROTEUS. As one relying on your lordship's will,
    And not depending on his friendly wish.
  PROTEUS. My lord, I cannot be so soon provided;
    Please you, deliberate a day or two.  
  PROTEUS. Thus have I shunn'd the fire for fear of burning,
    And drench'd me in the sea, where I am drown'd.
    I fear'd to show my father Julia's letter,
    Lest he should take exceptions to my love;
    And with the vantage of mine own excuse
    Hath he excepted most against my love.
    O, how this spring of love resembleth
    The uncertain glory of an April day,
    Which now shows all the beauty of the sun,
    And by an by a cloud takes all away!
                       Re-enter PANTHINO
  PROTEUS. Why, this it is: my heart accords thereto;
    And yet a thousand times it answers 'No.'             Exeunt








ACT II. SCENE I.
Milan. The DUKE'S palace
Enter VALENTINE and SPEED
  PROTEUS. Have patience, gentle Julia.
  PROTEUS. When possibly I can, I will return.
  PROTEUS. Why, then, we'll make exchange. Here, take you this.
  PROTEUS. Here is my hand for my true constancy;
    And when that hour o'erslips me in the day
    Wherein I sigh not, Julia, for thy sake,
    The next ensuing hour some foul mischance
    Torment me for my love's forgetfulness!
    My father stays my coming; answer not;
    The tide is now- nay, not thy tide of tears:
    That tide will stay me longer than I should.
    Julia, farewell!                                  Exit JULIA  
    What, gone without a word?
    Ay, so true love should do: it cannot speak;
    For truth hath better deeds than words to grace it.
                          Enter PANTHINO
  PROTEUS. Go; I come, I come.
    Alas! this parting strikes poor lovers dumb.          Exeunt
SCENE III.
Verona. A street
Enter LAUNCE, leading a dog
  PROTEUS. Not so, sweet lady; but too mean a servant
    To have a look of such a worthy mistress.
  PROTEUS. My duty will I boast of, nothing else.
  PROTEUS. I'll die on him that says so but yourself.
  PROTEUS. That you are worthless.
  
                          Re-enter THURIO
  PROTEUS. We'll both attend upon your ladyship.
                                        Exeunt SILVIA and THURIO
  PROTEUS. Your friends are well, and have them much commended.
  PROTEUS. I left them all in health.
  PROTEUS. My tales of love were wont to weary you;
    I know you joy not in a love-discourse.
  PROTEUS. Enough; I read your fortune in your eye.
    Was this the idol that you worship so?
  PROTEUS. No; but she is an earthly paragon.
  PROTEUS. I will not flatter her.
  PROTEUS. When I was sick you gave me bitter pills,
    And I must minister the like to you.  
  PROTEUS. Except my mistress.
  PROTEUS. Have I not reason to prefer mine own?
  PROTEUS. Why, Valentine, what braggardism is this?
  PROTEUS. Then let her alone.
  PROTEUS. But she loves you?
  PROTEUS. Go on before; I shall enquire you forth;
    I must unto the road to disembark
    Some necessaries that I needs must use;  
    And then I'll presently attend you.
  PROTEUS. I will.                                Exit VALENTINE
    Even as one heat another heat expels
    Or as one nail by strength drives out another,
    So the remembrance of my former love
    Is by a newer object quite forgotten.
    Is it my mind, or Valentinus' praise,
    Her true perfection, or my false transgression,
    That makes me reasonless to reason thus?
    She is fair; and so is Julia that I love-
    That I did love, for now my love is thaw'd;
    Which like a waxen image 'gainst a fire
    Bears no impression of the thing it was.
    Methinks my zeal to Valentine is cold,
    And that I love him not as I was wont.
    O! but I love his lady too too much,
    And that's the reason I love him so little.
    How shall I dote on her with more advice
    That thus without advice begin to love her!  
    'Tis but her picture I have yet beheld,
    And that hath dazzled my reason's light;
    But when I look on her perfections,
    There is no reason but I shall be blind.
    If I can check my erring love, I will;
    If not, to compass her I'll use my skill.               Exit
SCENE V.
Milan. A street
Enter SPEED and LAUNCE severally
  PROTEUS. To leave my Julia, shall I be forsworn;
    To love fair Silvia, shall I be forsworn;
    To wrong my friend, I shall be much forsworn;
    And ev'n that pow'r which gave me first my oath
    Provokes me to this threefold perjury:
    Love bade me swear, and Love bids me forswear.
    O sweet-suggesting Love, if thou hast sinn'd,
    Teach me, thy tempted subject, to excuse it!
    At first I did adore a twinkling star,
    But now I worship a celestial sun.
    Unheedful vows may heedfully be broken;
    And he wants wit that wants resolved will
    To learn his wit t' exchange the bad for better.
    Fie, fie, unreverend tongue, to call her bad
    Whose sovereignty so oft thou hast preferr'd
    With twenty thousand soul-confirming oaths!
    I cannot leave to love, and yet I do;  
    But there I leave to love where I should love.
    Julia I lose, and Valentine I lose;
    If I keep them, I needs must lose myself;
    If I lose them, thus find I by their loss:
    For Valentine, myself; for Julia, Silvia.
    I to myself am dearer than a friend;
    For love is still most precious in itself;
    And Silvia- witness heaven, that made her fair!-
    Shows Julia but a swarthy Ethiope.
    I will forget that Julia is alive,
    Rememb'ring that my love to her is dead;
    And Valentine I'll hold an enemy,
    Aiming at Silvia as a sweeter friend.
    I cannot now prove constant to myself
    Without some treachery us'd to Valentine.
    This night he meaneth with a corded ladder
    To climb celestial Silvia's chamber window,
    Myself in counsel, his competitor.
    Now presently I'll give her father notice
    Of their disguising and pretended flight,  
    Who, all enrag'd, will banish Valentine,
    For Thurio, he intends, shall wed his daughter;
    But, Valentine being gone, I'll quickly cross
    By some sly trick blunt Thurio's dull proceeding.
    Love, lend me wings to make my purpose swift,
    As thou hast lent me wit to plot this drift.            Exit
SCENE VII.
Verona. JULIA'S house
Enter JULIA and LUCETTA
  PROTEUS. My gracious lord, that which I would discover
    The law of friendship bids me to conceal;
    But, when I call to mind your gracious favours
    Done to me, undeserving as I am,
    My duty pricks me on to utter that
    Which else no worldly good should draw from me.
    Know, worthy prince, Sir Valentine, my friend,
    This night intends to steal away your daughter;
    Myself am one made privy to the plot.
    I know you have determin'd to bestow her
    On Thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates;
    And should she thus be stol'n away from you,
    It would be much vexation to your age.
    Thus, for my duty's sake, I rather chose  
    To cross my friend in his intended drift
    Than, by concealing it, heap on your head
    A pack of sorrows which would press you down,
    Being unprevented, to your timeless grave.
  PROTEUS. Know, noble lord, they have devis'd a mean
    How he her chamber window will ascend
    And with a corded ladder fetch her down;
    For which the youthful lover now is gone,
    And this way comes he with it presently;
    Where, if it please you, you may intercept him.
    But, good my lord, do it so cunningly
    That my discovery be not aimed at;
    For love of you, not hate unto my friend,
    Hath made me publisher of this pretence.
  PROTEUS. Adieu, my lord; Sir Valentine is coming.         Exit
                        Enter VALENTINE
  PROTEUS. Run, boy, run, run, seek him out.
  PROTEUS. What seest thou?  
  PROTEUS. Valentine?
  PROTEUS. Who then? his spirit?
  PROTEUS. What then?
  PROTEUS. Who wouldst thou strike?
  PROTEUS. Villain, forbear.
  PROTEUS. Sirrah, I say, forbear. Friend Valentine, a word.
  PROTEUS. Then in dumb silence will I bury mine,
    For they are harsh, untuneable, and bad.
  PROTEUS. No, Valentine.  
  PROTEUS. No, Valentine.
  PROTEUS. That thou art banished- O, that's the news!-
    From hence, from Silvia, and from me thy friend.
  PROTEUS. Ay, ay; and she hath offered to the doom-
    Which, unrevers'd, stands in effectual force-
    A sea of melting pearl, which some call tears;
    Those at her father's churlish feet she tender'd;
    With them, upon her knees, her humble self,
    Wringing her hands, whose whiteness so became them
    As if but now they waxed pale for woe.
    But neither bended knees, pure hands held up,
    Sad sighs, deep groans, nor silver-shedding tears,  
    Could penetrate her uncompassionate sire-
    But Valentine, if he be ta'en, must die.
    Besides, her intercession chaf'd him so,
    When she for thy repeal was suppliant,
    That to close prison he commanded her,
    With many bitter threats of biding there.
  PROTEUS. Cease to lament for that thou canst not help,
    And study help for that which thou lament'st.
    Time is the nurse and breeder of all good.
    Here if thou stay thou canst not see thy love;
    Besides, thy staying will abridge thy life.
    Hope is a lover's staff; walk hence with that,
    And manage it against despairing thoughts.
    Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence,
    Which, being writ to me, shall be deliver'd
    Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love.  
    The time now serves not to expostulate.
    Come, I'll convey thee through the city gate;
    And, ere I part with thee, confer at large
    Of all that may concern thy love affairs.
    As thou lov'st Silvia, though not for thyself,
    Regard thy danger, and along with me.
  PROTEUS. Go, sirrah, find him out. Come, Valentine.
  PROTEUS. Gone, my good lord.
  PROTEUS. A little time, my lord, will kill that grief.
  PROTEUS. Longer than I prove loyal to your Grace
    Let me not live to look upon your Grace.
  PROTEUS. I do, my lord.
  PROTEUS. She did, my lord, when Valentine was here.
  PROTEUS. The best way is to slander Valentine
    With falsehood, cowardice, and poor descent-
    Three things that women highly hold in hate.
  PROTEUS. Ay, if his enemy deliver it;
    Therefore it must with circumstance be spoken
    By one whom she esteemeth as his friend.
  PROTEUS. And that, my lord, I shall be loath to do:
    'Tis an ill office for a gentleman,
    Especially against his very friend.
  PROTEUS. You have prevail'd, my lord; if I can do it
    By aught that I can speak in his dispraise,
    She shall not long continue love to him.
    But say this weed her love from Valentine,
    It follows not that she will love Sir Thurio.
  PROTEUS. As much as I can do I will effect.
    But you, Sir Thurio, are not sharp enough;
    You must lay lime to tangle her desires
    By wailful sonnets, whose composed rhymes
    Should be full-fraught with serviceable vows.
  PROTEUS. Say that upon the altar of her beauty
    You sacrifice your tears, your sighs, your heart;  
    Write till your ink be dry, and with your tears
    Moist it again, and frame some feeling line
    That may discover such integrity;
    For Orpheus' lute was strung with poets' sinews,
    Whose golden touch could soften steel and stones,
    Make tigers tame, and huge leviathans
    Forsake unsounded deeps to dance on sands.
    After your dire-lamenting elegies,
    Visit by night your lady's chamber window
    With some sweet consort; to their instruments
    Tune a deploring dump- the night's dead silence
    Will well become such sweet-complaining grievance.
    This, or else nothing, will inherit her.
  PROTEUS. We'll wait upon your Grace till after supper,
    And afterward determine our proceedings.
  PROTEUS. Already have I been false to Valentine,
    And now I must be as unjust to Thurio.
    Under the colour of commending him
    I have access my own love to prefer;
    But Silvia is too fair, too true, too holy,
    To be corrupted with my worthless gifts.
    When I protest true loyalty to her,
    She twits me with my falsehood to my friend;
    When to her beauty I commend my vows,
    She bids me think how I have been forsworn
    In breaking faith with Julia whom I lov'd;
    And notwithstanding all her sudden quips,
    The least whereof would quell a lover's hope,
    Yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love
    The more it grows and fawneth on her still.
                 Enter THURIO and MUSICIANS  
    But here comes Thurio. Now must we to her window,
    And give some evening music to her ear.
  PROTEUS. Ay, gentle Thurio; for you know that love
    Will creep in service where it cannot go.
  PROTEUS. Sir, but I do; or else I would be hence.
  PROTEUS. Ay, Silvia- for your sake.
  PROTEUS. Sir Thurio, fear not you; I will so plead
    That you shall say my cunning drift excels.
  PROTEUS. At Saint Gregory's well.
  PROTEUS. Madam, good ev'n to your ladyship.
  PROTEUS. One, lady, if you knew his pure heart's truth,
    You would quickly learn to know him by his voice.
  PROTEUS. Sir Proteus, gentle lady, and your servant.
  PROTEUS. That I may compass yours.
  PROTEUS. I grant, sweet love, that I did love a lady;  
    But she is dead.
  PROTEUS. I likewise hear that Valentine is dead.
  PROTEUS. Sweet lady, let me rake it from the earth.
  PROTEUS. Madam, if your heart be so obdurate,
    Vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love,
    The picture that is hanging in your chamber;
    To that I'll speak, to that I'll sigh and weep;
    For, since the substance of your perfect self
    Is else devoted, I am but a shadow;  
    And to your shadow will I make true love.
  PROTEUS. As wretches have o'ernight
    That wait for execution in the morn.
                                       Exeunt PROTEUS and SILVIA
  PROTEUS. Sebastian is thy name? I like thee well,
    And will employ thee in some service presently.  
  PROTEUS..I hope thou wilt.  [To LAUNCE]  How now, you whoreson
      peasant!
    Where have you been these two days loitering?
  PROTEUS. And what says she to my little jewel?
  PROTEUS. But she receiv'd my dog?
  PROTEUS. What, didst thou offer her this from me?
  PROTEUS. Go, get thee hence and find my dog again,
    Or ne'er return again into my sight.
    Away, I say. Stayest thou to vex me here?        Exit LAUNCE
    A slave that still an end turns me to shame!  
    Sebastian, I have entertained thee
    Partly that I have need of such a youth
    That can with some discretion do my business,
    For 'tis no trusting to yond foolish lout,
    But chiefly for thy face and thy behaviour,
    Which, if my augury deceive me not,
    Witness good bringing up, fortune, and truth;
    Therefore, know thou, for this I entertain thee.
    Go presently, and take this ring with thee,
    Deliver it to Madam Silvia-
    She lov'd me well deliver'd it to me.
  PROTEUS. Not so; I think she lives.
  PROTEUS. Why dost thou cry 'Alas'?
  PROTEUS. Wherefore shouldst thou pity her?
  PROTEUS. Well, give her that ring, and therewithal
    This letter. That's her chamber. Tell my lady
    I claim the promise for her heavenly picture.
    Your message done, hie home unto my chamber,
    Where thou shalt find me sad and solitary.      Exit PROTEUS
  PROTEUS. O, sir, I find her milder than she was;
    And yet she takes exceptions at your person.
  PROTEUS. No; that it is too little.
  PROTEUS. She says it is a fair one.
  PROTEUS. But pearls are fair; and the old saying is:
    Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes.
  PROTEUS. Ill, when you talk of war.
  PROTEUS. O, sir, she makes no doubt of that.
  PROTEUS. That you are well deriv'd.
  PROTEUS. O, ay; and pities them.
  PROTEUS. That they are out by lease.
  PROTEUS. Nor I.  
  PROTEUS. Neither.
  PROTEUS. And I will follow, more for Silvia's love
    Than hate of Eglamour, that goes with her.              Exit
  PROTEUS. Madam, this service I have done for you,
    Though you respect not aught your servant doth,
    To hazard life, and rescue you from him
    That would have forc'd your honour and your love.
    Vouchsafe me, for my meed, but one fair look;
    A smaller boon than this I cannot beg,
    And less than this, I am sure, you cannot give.
  PROTEUS. Unhappy were you, madam, ere I came;
    But by my coming I have made you happy.
  PROTEUS. What dangerous action, stood it next to death,
    Would I not undergo for one calm look?
    O, 'tis the curse in love, and still approv'd,
    When women cannot love where they're belov'd!
  PROTEUS. In love,
    Who respects friend?
  PROTEUS. Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words
    Can no way change you to a milder form,
    I'll woo you like a soldier, at arms' end,
    And love you 'gainst the nature of love- force ye.
  PROTEUS. I'll force thee yield to my desire.
  PROTEUS. Valentine!
  PROTEUS. My shame and guilt confounds me.
    Forgive me, Valentine; if hearty sorrow
    Be a sufficient ransom for offence,
    I tender 't here; I do as truly suffer
    As e'er I did commit.
  PROTEUS. Look to the boy.
  PROTEUS. Where is that ring, boy?
  PROTEUS. How! let me see. Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.
  PROTEUS. But how cam'st thou by this ring?
    At my depart I gave this unto Julia.
  PROTEUS. How! Julia!
  PROTEUS. Than men their minds! 'tis true. O heaven, were man
    But constant, he were perfect! That one error
    Fills him with faults; makes him run through all th' sins:
    Inconstancy falls off ere it begins.
    What is in Silvia's face but I may spy
    More fresh in Julia's with a constant eye?
  PROTEUS. Bear witness, heaven, I have my wish for ever.
