  CORIN. That is the way to make her scorn you still.
  CORIN. I partly guess; for I have lov'd ere now.
  CORIN. Into a thousand that I have forgotten.
  CORIN. Who calls?
  CORIN. Else are they very wretched.
  CORIN. And to you, gentle sir, and to you all.
  CORIN. Fair sir, I pity her,
    And wish, for her sake more than for mine own,
    My fortunes were more able to relieve her;
    But I am shepherd to another man,  
    And do not shear the fleeces that I graze.
    My master is of churlish disposition,
    And little recks to find the way to heaven
    By doing deeds of hospitality.
    Besides, his cote, his flocks, and bounds of feed,
    Are now on sale; and at our sheepcote now,
    By reason of his absence, there is nothing
    That you will feed on; but what is, come see,
    And in my voice most welcome shall you be.
  CORIN. That young swain that you saw here but erewhile,
    That little cares for buying any thing.
  CORIN. Assuredly the thing is to be sold.
    Go with me; if you like upon report
    The soil, the profit, and this kind of life,  
    I will your very faithful feeder be,
    And buy it with your gold right suddenly.             Exeunt
SCENE V.
Another part of the forest
Enter AMIENS, JAQUES, and OTHERS
                       SONG
  CORIN. And how like you this shepherd's life, Master Touchstone?
  CORIN. No more but that I know the more one sickens the worse at
    ease he is; and that he that wants money, means, and content, is
    without three good friends; that the property of rain is to wet,
    and fire to burn; that good pasture makes fat sheep; and that a
    great cause of the night is lack of the sun; that he that hath
    learned no wit by nature nor art may complain of good breeding,
    or comes of a very dull kindred.
  CORIN. No, truly.
  CORIN. Nay, I hope.
  CORIN. For not being at court? Your reason.
  CORIN. Not a whit, Touchstone. Those that are good manners at the
    court are as ridiculous in the country as the behaviour of the
    country is most mockable at the court. You told me you salute not
    at the court, but you kiss your hands; that courtesy would be
    uncleanly if courtiers were shepherds.
  CORIN. Why, we are still handling our ewes; and their fells, you
    know, are greasy.
  CORIN. Besides, our hands are hard.
  CORIN. And they are often tarr'd over with the surgery of our  
    sheep; and would you have us kiss tar? The courtier's hands are
    perfum'd with civet.
  CORIN. You have too courtly a wit for me; I'll rest.
  CORIN. Sir, I am a true labourer: I earn that I eat, get that I
    wear; owe no man hate, envy no man's happiness; glad of other
    men's good, content with my harm; and the greatest of my pride is
    to see my ewes graze and my lambs suck.
  CORIN. Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistress's brother.
                  Enter ROSALIND, reading a paper
  CORIN. Mistress and master, you have oft enquired
    After the shepherd that complain'd of love,
    Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
    Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
    That was his mistress.
  CORIN. If you will see a pageant truly play'd
    Between the pale complexion of true love
    And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
    Go hence a little, and I shall conduct you,
    If you will mark it.
  CORIN. Our master and mistress seeks you; come away, away.
